

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Alijan Nanhe Pehalwan Qureshi vs State Of Maharashtra on 10 November, 1980Equivalent citations: 1981 AIR  645, 1981 SCR  (1)1194
Author: V Krishnaiyer
Bench: Krishnaiyer, V.R.
           PETITIONER:
ALIJAN NANHE PEHALWAN QURESHI

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF MAHARASHTRA

DATE OF JUDGMENT10/11/1980

BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
KOSHAL, A.D.

CITATION:
 1981 AIR  645		  1981 SCR  (1)1194
 1981 SCC  (1) 415


ACT:
     Procedure-High Court's  judgment-In cases	where severe
sentence had  been inflicted  by the trial court. High Court
must give a reasoned judgment



HEADNOTE:
     In so  serious a  crime as	 murder where  so  severe  a
sentence as  life imprisonment	has been  inflicted  by	 the
trial court  and the  appeal is	 as of right, the High Court
must indicate in a reasoned judgment that it has applied its
mind to	 the material  questions of fact and law. A judgment
may be	brief but not a blank especially in a situation such
as this. [1194 F-G]



JUDGMENT:
     CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Special Leave Petition
(Crl.) No. 1620 of 1980.
     From the  Judgment and  order dated  13-11-1979 of	 the
Bombay High Court in Criminal Appeal No 1310 of 1979.
     Pramod Swarup for the Petitioner.
     M. C. Bhandare and M. N. Shroff for the Respondent.
     The order of the Court was delivered by
     KRISHNA IYER  J.-We were  not happy  at the disposal by
the High  Court of  a case  under s.  302 I.P.C.  without  a
speaking order.	 After all  in so serious a crime as murder,
where so  severe a  sentence as	 life imprisonment  has been
inflicted by  the trial court and the appeal is as of right,
the High  Court must indicate in a reasoned judgment that it
has applied  its mind  to the material questions of fact and
law. A	judgment may be brief but not a blank, especially in
a situation  such as  this. For	 this reason  we should have
straightaway set  aside the  judgment of  the High Court and
sent it	 back for fresh hearing, but under Article 136 where
justice is  the paramount  consideration we wanted to reduce
the delay  in the  proceedings since  there is a sentence of
life imprisonment  on the petitioner so we directed that the
original record	 be sent  for so  that counsel on both sides
may
1195
have the  opportunity to  peruse the entire case records and
make   submissions to us as if we were hearing the appeal in
the regular  course. Counsel have had that facility and have
made submissions  after perusal	 of the	 materials. After  a
brief hearing  counsel for  the	 petitioner  was  unable  to
demonstrate that  the trial court's judgment was vitiated by
any flaw  in  appreciation  of	evidence  or  assessment  of
probabilities. We,  therefore,	dismiss	 the  Special  Leave
Petition after satisfying ourselves that natural justice has
had its full play. Dismissed.
P.B.R.					 Petition dismissed.
1196




