

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
K. Dheenadhayalan vs State Of Tamil Nadu And Anr on 22 April, 1980Equivalent citations: 1980 SCR  (3) 777
Author: R Pathak
Bench: Pathak, R.S.
           PETITIONER:
K. DHEENADHAYALAN

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF TAMIL NADU AND ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT22/04/1980

BENCH:
PATHAK, R.S.
BENCH:
PATHAK, R.S.
SARKARIA, RANJIT SINGH

CITATION:
 1980 SCR  (3) 777


ACT:
     Seniority List-Fresh  Inter-se seniority  List drawn as
per the principles indicated by the High Court and according
to  the	 special  Rules	 for  Tamil  Nadu  Commercial  Taxes
Service-Petitioner not	a  party  before  the  High  Court's
proceedings-Whether directions would bind the petitioner-The
power of  the High  Court to  fill up the lacuna in an order
assailed.



HEADNOTE:
     Under the	Special Rules  of the  Tamil Nadu Commercial
Taxes Service,	recruitment to	the junior  most post, Joint
Commercial Tax	Officer is  made by  direct recruitment	 and
recruitment by	transfer from Deputy Commercial Tax Officers
in the	State Commercial  Taxes Subordinate  Services in the
proportion 1:2.	 The higher  posts are	filled by  promotion
from officers  in the  category of  posts immediately below.
Under Rule 2(b) all promotions are to be made on the grounds
of merit and ability, seniority being considered where merit
and ability  are equal. Rule 5(c) provides that every person
appointed as  a Joint  Commercial Tax  Officer	must  be  on
probation for  at least	 two years  on duty;  in the case of
direct recruitment  the probationary  period commences	from
the date on which the officer completes his training and; in
the case  of recruitment  by transfer  it commences from the
date the  officer joins duty. Under rule 7(b), the period of
training  of   a  direct  recruit  does	 not  count  towards
probation.
     The petitioner  was recruited  to the  Cadre  of  Joint
Commercial Tax	Officer as  a direct recruit in 1966 and was
posted for  training which  he joined  on 6th  June 1966; he
commenced his  period of  probation on	18th August 1967. On
16th August 1972, the petitioner was promoted to the post of
Commercial Tax	Officer and  on 14th  January  1976  he	 was
promoted as  Assistant Commissioner.  The second  respondent
joined the  post  of  Joint  Commercial	 Tax  Officer  as  a
promotee on  25th January  1967 and  commenced his probation
from that date. He was promoted as Commercial Tax Officer on
17th December  1972 and	 as Assistant  Commissioner on	26th
August 1976.
     In the  combined  inter-se	 seniority  list  issued  in
G.O.Ms. No.  4103 dated 9th July 1973, herein the petitioner
and the	 second respondent  were shown	in the	1966 list at
serial numbers	43 and	52 respectively. The validity of the
combined inter-se  seniority list was challenged in two writ
petitions Nos.	2016 and 2017 of 1972 filed by certain other
officers in respect of the ranking from serial numbers 51 to
serial number 78. The petitioner was not a party to the writ
petition. The  writ petition  was allowed by the Madras High
Court. The  High Court	took note  of the fact that no rules
had  been  framed  indicating  how  the	 inter-se  seniority
between the  direct recruits and the transferee recruits had
to be  fixed and therefore directed a fresh determination of
the inter-se seniority on the basis of three principles: (i)
Each year  should be taken as a unit for fixing the inter-se
seniority; (ii)	 Persons not  actually appointed in the year
1966 should not be included in the 1966 year's list
778
and their  seniority should  be determined with reference to
the date  of their joining as Joint Commercial Tax Officers;
and (iii)  The date  on which an officer commences probation
is the proper criterion for fixing the inter-se seniority.
     In	 the   new  combined  inter-se	seniority  list,  so
prepared and  issued by	 the Government	 in their  order No.
G.O. Ms.  No. 2228 dated 27th December 1977, both the second
respondent and the petitioner were shown at serial number 48
and serial  No.	 49  respectively  in  the  1967  List.	 The
petitioner, apprehending  that the seniority assigned to him
in the	second combined	 inter-se seniority  list  of  Joint
Commercial  Tax	  Officers  would   prejudice  him   in	 the
promotions  to	 be  made   to	the   category	 of   Deputy
Commissioners has  challenged the validity of that seniority
list.
     Dismissing the petition, the Court
^
     HELD: 1.  Where the rules are specifically silent there
is no doubt that the Government is entitled to make an order
filling up  any lacuna	or uncovered gap in the rules. There
is good	 reason in  the principle followed in this case that
seniority  should  be  based  on  the  length  of  effective
service. The  date of  confirmation in a post then loses its
relevance. [781 F-G]
     2. The  principle that  officers whose  effective entry
into the  service pertains  to a  particular year  should be
regarded as  a unit  in themselves for fixing their inter-se
seniority is valid. Correctly, therefore, the petitioner and
the second  respondent have  been placed  in the  1967 List.
Since the  Special Rules do not contemplate any credit being
given for  the period  of training  undergone  by  a  direct
recruit and  the probationary period commences only when the
training ends,	the year of appointment is of little moment.
[781 B-C, D-E]
     3. The  principles propounded  by the  High  Court	 are
principles of  general application  and drawn from the rules
governing the service and the concepts implied therein. They
are not principles applicable peculiarly only to the parties
to the	writ petitions.	 They  are  principles	which  could
legitimately form the basis of a combined inter se seniority
list in respect of Joint Commercial Tax Officers. The places
assigned to  the petitioner  and the  second respondent duly
represent their	 relative seniority.  The  second  seniority
list was  prepared after issuing notice to all including the
petitioner and prepared after considering objections raised.
[782 A-C]



JUDGMENT:
     ORIGINAL JURISDICTION: Writ Petition No. 461 of 1979.
	   (Under Article 32 of the Constitution)
     Dr. Y. S. Chitale, R. Mohan, P. N. Ramalingam and A. T.
M. Sampath for the Petitioner.
     A. V. Rangam for the Respondent.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     PATHAK, J.-The  Tamil  Nadu  Commercial  Taxes  Service
consists of  a hierarchy of posts. At the base lies the post
of Joint  Commercial Tax  Officer, above  it is	 the post of
Commercial Tax	Officer,  then	of  Assistant  Commissioner,
thereafter of Deputy Commissioner and
779
finally	 there	 is  the  post	of  Selection  Grade  Deputy
Commissioner. The  service is  governed by the Special Rules
for the	 Tamil Nadu  Commercial Taxes  Service (the "Special
Rules"). Recruitment  to the  junior most  post,  the  Joint
Commercial Tax	Officer, is  made by  (i) direct recruitment
and (ii)  recruitment by transfer from Deputy Commercial Tax
Officers in  the State Commercial Taxes Subordinate Service.
Permanent vacancies  in the  posts of  Joint Commercial	 Tax
Officer are  filled by	direct recruitment and by "transfer"
recruitment in	the proportion	1:2. The  higher  posts	 are
filled by  promotion from  officers in the category of posts
immediately below.  Under rule 2(b) of the Special Rules all
promotions are	to be  made on	the  grounds  of  merit	 and
ability, seniority  being considered  only where  merit	 and
ability are  equal. Rule  5(c) provides	 that  every  person
appointed as  a Joint  Commercial Tax  Officer	must  be  on
probation for  at least	 two years  on duty;  in the case of
direct recruitment  the probationary  period commences	from
the date on which the Officer completes his training, and in
the case  of recruitment  by transfer  it commences from the
date the  officer joins	 duty. Under rule 7(b) the period of
training  of   a  direct  recruit  does	 not  count  towards
probation.
     The petitioner  was recruited  to the  cadre  of  Joint
Commercial Tax Officers as a direct recruit in 1966, and was
posted for  training which  he joined  on  6th	June,  1966;
thereafter he  completed  the  probationary  period  of	 two
years. On  16th August,	 1972 the petitioner was promoted to
the post  of Commercial	 Tax Officer.  The second respondent
was promoted  as Commercial  Tax Officer  on 17th  December,
1972.
     Promotion to  the next  higher category  of posts,	 the
Assistant  Commissioners,   followed.  The   petitioner	 was
promoted as  Assistant Commissioner  on 14th  January,	1976
while the  second respondent  was promoted  on 26th  August,
1976.
     Meanwhile, by  G.O. Ms.  No. 4103	dated 9th July, 1973
the Government passed an order notifying the combined inter-
se seniority list of directly recruited Joint Commercial Tax
Officers during	 the years  1964 to  1967 and the transferee
Joint Commercial  Tax Officers	recruited during  the  years
1964 and  1966 on  the basis  of the principles set forth in
that order.  The seniority list reflected the cyclical order
based on rule 2(c) of the Special Rules, that is to say, (i)
direct recruit	(ii)  transferee  recruit  (iii)  transferee
recruit. The  petitioner was  shown in	the "1966  list"  at
serial No. 43 of the overall seniority list and 18th August,
1967 was shown as the date of commencement of his probation.
The second  respondent was  also shown	in the 1966 list, at
serial No.  52 with  25th  January,  1967  as  the  date  of
commencement of his probation.
780
     The validity  of the  combined inter-se  seniority list
was challenged	by two	writ petitions,	 Writ Petitions Nos.
2016 and  2017 of  1972 filed  by certain  other officers in
respect of  the ranking	 from serial  number  51  to  serial
Number 78.  The petitioner  was not  a	party  to  the	writ
petitions. The	writ petitions	were allowed  by the  Madras
High Court  by its  judgment dated 16th September, 1975. The
High Court  took note  of the  fact that  no rules  had been
framed indicating  how the  inter-se seniority	between	 the
direct recruits and the transferee recruits had to be fixed.
The High  Court quashed	 the seniority	list and  directed a
fresh determination  of the  inter-se seniority on the basis
of three principles:
     1.	  Each year should be taken as a unit for fixing the
	  inter-se seniority.
     2.	  Persons not  actually appointed  in the  year 1966
	  should not be included in the 1966 year's list and
	  their	 seniority   should   be   determined	with
	  reference to	the date  of their  joining as Joint
	  Commercial Tax Officers; and
     3.	  The date  on which  an officer commences probation
	  is the  proper criterion  for fixing	the inter-se
	  seniority.
     Taking those  principles into  account, the  Government
then prepared  a fresh	combined inter-se seniority list and
published it  by an  order set	forth in G.O. No. 2228 dated
27th December,	1977. The second respondent was now shown at
serial number  48 and  the petitioner  was shown  at  serial
number 49 in the 1967 list.
     The  petitioner,	apprehensive  that   the   seniority
assigned to  him in  the second	 combined inter-se seniority
list of Joint Commercial Tax Officers would prejudice him in
the  promotions	 to  be	 made  to  the	category  of  Deputy
Commissioners, has challenged the validity of that seniority
list.
     The petitioner  contends that  the High  Court  has  no
power to  lay down  the principles  for determining inter-se
seniority between  direct recruits  and transferee  recruits
and, in any event, his seniority cannot be determined on the
basis of the principles laid down by the High Court inasmuch
as he  was not a party to the writ petitions. The petitioner
also takes exception to the statement contained in paragraph
16 of the State Government's counter affidavit to the effect
that the  seniority of	a Government  Officer in  the  lower
category is  also the  basis for  assigning seniority in the
higher	category.  Great  emphasis  has	 been  laid  by	 the
petitioner on  the circumstance	 that  he  joined  as  Joint
Commercial Tax Officer earlier than the second respondent.
781
     In our  opinion, the  principles which  the High  Court
culled	out  as	 the  basis  for  determining  the  inter-se
seniority of  Joint Commercial	Tax Officers are in the main
drawn from  the rules  governing the service. The petitioner
cannot claim  that for	the purpose of seniority has service
must be	 considered with  reference to	the date on which he
commenced the  period of training. The special Rules require
that a	direct recruit	must undergo  a period	of training.
They also  provide that	 he must  pass through	a period  of
probation. They	 further declare that the period of training
will not  count as  a period spent on probation and that the
probationary period  commences only  when the training ends.
That  being  so,  the  relevant	 date  for  considering	 the
petitioner's seniority	is 18th	 August, 1967.	The rules do
not contemplate	 any credit  being given  for the  period of
training undergone  by a  direct recruit and, therefore, the
fact that  he was appointed in 1966 is of little moment. The
second respondent  joined the  post of	Joint Commercial Tax
Officer as  a transferee  recruit and  therefore the date of
commencement  of  his  probation  was  25th  January,  1967.
Clearly, he entered service effectively from an earlier date
than the petitioner.
     Now having regard to the circumstance that the cadre of
Joint Commercial  Tax Officers	is drawn  both	from  direct
recruits and  transferee recruits, it is necessary to have a
single combined	 inter-se seniority  list. There  can be  no
quarrel with  the principle  that officers  whose  effective
entry into  the service pertains to a particular year should
be regarded  as a unit in themselves for fixing their inter-
se seniority.  Correctly, therefore,  the petitioner and the
second respondent have been placed in the 1967 list. We have
already observed  that the  effective date on which a direct
recruit joins  as a Joint Commercial Tax Officer is the date
on which he commences his probation. In the determination of
inter-se  seniority,   the  High   Court  has  followed	 the
provision in  the Special  Rules that  the  posts  of  Joint
Commercial Tax	Officers are  to be filled in the proportion
of 1  : 2  between direct  recruits and transferee recruits.
The cyclical  order in which the vacancies will be filled on
that basis  are provided  by the  order	 of  the  Government
published in  G.O. Ms.	No. 4103 dated 9th July, 1973. Where
the rules are specifically silent there is no doubt that the
Government is  entitled to  make an  order  filling  up	 any
lacuna or  uncovered gap  in  the  rules.  It  may  also  be
observed that there is good reason in the principle followed
in this case that seniority should be based on the length of
effective service.  The date  of confirmation in a post then
loses its relevance.
     In regard	to the	contention of the petitioner that he
was not	 a party  to the  writ petitions decided by the High
Court and that, therefore, the
782
principles laid	 down in  the High Court judgment should not
be applied  to him,  we think  the submission  to be without
force. The  principles propounded  by  the  High  Court	 are
principles of  general application  and drawn from the rules
governing the service and the concepts implied therein. They
are not principles applicable peculiarly only to the parties
to the	writ petitions.	 Indeed, we  find no  fault with the
terms in which the principles have been enunciated. They are
principles which  could legitimately  form the	basis  of  a
combined  inter-se   seniority	list  in  respect  of  Joint
Commercial  Tax	  Officers.  Having   due  regard   to	 the
considerations mentioned  above, we  are of opinion that the
places	assigned   in  the  second  seniority  list  to	 the
petitioner and	the second  respondent truly represent their
relative seniority.
     We may  also observe that the second seniority list was
prepared  after	  issuing  notice   to	the  petitioner	 and
affording him  an opportunity  to be heard in the matter. It
was after  all the  objections had  been considered that the
list was  finally drawn up. As regards the point whether the
seniority of  the petitioner in the category of posts higher
than the category of Joint Commercial Tax Officers should be
determined on the basis of his seniority as Joint Commercial
Tax Officer,  that  is	a  question  which  does  not  arise
presently. No combined inter-se seniority list in respect of
the cadre  of Assistant	 Commissioners or  of  higher  posts
appears to  have been  drawn up. There is no material before
us to  show that it has and, if it has, what is the position
of seniority  assigned to  the petitioner  therein.  In	 the
circumstances we  think it  premature to express any opinion
on this point.
     The  second   seniority  list   was  prepared  on	27th
December, 1977. The writ petition was filed in this Court in
May,  1979.   The  gross   delay,  plainly  apparent,  would
constitute  another   ground  for   denying  relief  to	 the
petitioner. But as, in our judgment, the petitioner fails on
the merits  we need  not go  further into  the	question  of
laches.
     The  petition  fails  and	is  dismissed,	but  in	 the
circumstances there is no order as to costs.
S.R.					  Petition dismissed
783




