

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Nepal Singh vs State Of U.P. And Ors on 15 April, 1980Equivalent citations: 1980 AIR 1459, 1980 SCR  (3) 613
Author: R Pathak
Bench: Pathak, R.S.
           PETITIONER:
NEPAL SINGH

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF U.P. AND ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT15/04/1980

BENCH:
PATHAK, R.S.
BENCH:
PATHAK, R.S.
SARKARIA, RANJIT SINGH

CITATION:
 1980 AIR 1459		  1980 SCR  (3) 613
 1980 SCC  (3) 288


ACT:
     Termination  Simpliciter-An   order   terminating	 the
services of  a temporary  Government  servant  and  ex-facie
innocuous in  that it  does  not  cast	any  stigma  on	 the
Government servant  or visits  him with	 penal	consequences
amounts to termination simpliciter-Order does not contravene
Article 311 (2) of the Constitution of India 1950.



HEADNOTE:
     The appellant  was a temporary sub-inspector of Police.
While he  was posted  at Shahjahanpur  the Superintendent of
Police,	 Shahjahanpur	commenced  disciplinary	 proceedings
against him  on the  charge that  he had violated Rule 29 of
the U.P.  Government Servants Conduct Rules, 1956 in as much
as  without  prior  permission	of  the	 Government  he	 had
contracted a  second marriage  in November,  1964, while his
first wife  was alive.	At the stage of evidence, the Deputy
Inspector General of Police, Bareilly made an order on March
12, 1970 quashing the disciplinary proceedings on the ground
that the offence has been committed at Pithoragarh, situated
in a  different police range, and therefore, the proceedings
taken against the appellant were incompetent.
     Meanwhile, on  March 8,  1970, the Inspector General of
Police,	 Uttar	 Pradesh,  had	 issued	 a   letter  to	 all
Superintendents of  Police in  the State  directing them  to
submit	a   list  of  Sub-inspectors  whose  reputation	 and
integrity were	very low  or who  were generally involved in
scandalous  conduct,  drinking,	 immorality  or	 other	acts
injurious to  the reputation  of the  Police Service  or who
were  involved	encouraging  crime.  The  Superintendent  of
Police, Shahjahanpur  included the  name of the appellant in
the list  submitted by	him. On	 April	27,  1970,  the	 Dy.
Inspector General  of Police  made an  order terminating the
services of the appellant, reciting that the services of the
appellant  "are	 no  more  required  and  that	he  will  be
considered to have ceased to be in service......"
     The appellant  filed a  Writ Petition against the order
terminating  his   services  and   claimed  that  the  order
contravened Article  311(2) of	the Constitution inasmuch as
it was	an order  imposing the	punishment of  dismissal  or
removal	 from  service	without	 satisfying  the  conditions
prescribed therein.  Allegations of malafide were also made.
The Writ  Petition was	dismissed. An appeal to the Division
Bench was also dismissed. Hence the appeal by special leave.
     Dismissing the appeal, the Court.
^
     HELD:  1.	 It  is	  now  settled	law  that  an  order
terminating the	 services of  a temporary Government servant
and ex	facie innocuous	 in that it does not cast any stigma
on  the	  Government  servant	or  visits  him	 with  penal
consequences must  be regarded	as effecting  a	 termination
simpliciter, but  if  it  is  discovered  on  the  basis  of
material adduced that although innocent in its
614
terms the  order was passed in fact with a view to punishing
the Government	servant, it is a punitive order which can be
passed	only   after  complying	 with  Art.  311(2)  of	 the
Constitution. [615H, 616A-B]
     2. The  question which  calls for	determination in all
such cases  is	whether	 the  facts  satisfy  the  criterion
repeatedly laid	 down by  this Court  that an  order is	 not
passed by  way of  punishment, and  is merely  an  order  of
termination  simpliciter,   if	the   material	against	 the
Government servant on which the superior authority has acted
constitutes the motive and not the foundation for the order.
The application of the test is not always easy. In each case
it is  necessary  to  examine  the  entire  range  of  facts
carefully and  consider whether	 in the light of those facts
the superior  authority intended  to punish  the  Government
servant or,  having regard  to his  character,	conduct	 and
suitability in	relation to  the post  held by	him  it	 was
intended simply	 to terminate  his services. The function of
the Court  is  to  discover  the  nature  of  the  order  by
attempting   to	   ascertain   what   was   the	  motivating
consideration in  the mind  of the  authority which prompted
the order. [616B-E]
     In the  instant case: (a) the appellant was a temporary
Government servant,  and the  question whether	he should be
retained in service was a matter which arose directly during
the drive  instituted by  the Inspector General of Police in
March  1970   for  weeding  out	 Police	 Officers  who	were
unsuitable or  unfit to	 be continued  in service;  (b)	 the
material which	the Superintendent  of Police considered was
sufficient to lead to the conclusion that the appellant, who
was a  temporary Government  servant, was  not suitable	 for
being retained	in service-his general character and conduct
led to	that impression	 and there  was nothing to show that
the impugned  order was	 made by  way of punishment; (c) the
circumstance  that   a	disciplinary   proceeding  had	been
instituted against  him earlier	 does not  in itself lead to
the  inference	that  the  impugned  order  was	 by  way  of
punishment, and	 (d) the  impugned order was not intended by
way of punishment. [616E-G]
     State of  Maharashtra v.  Veerappa R.  Saboji and	Anr.
[1980] 1 S.C.R. 551 A.I.R. 1980 SC 42; applied.
     State of  Bihar and  Ors.	v.  Shiva  Bhikshuk  Mishra,
[1971] 2  S.C.R. 191;  State of	 U.P. & Ors. v. Sughar Singh
[1974] 2  S.C.R. 335  and Regional  Manager &  Anr. v. Pawan
Kumar Dubey; [1976] 3 S.C.R. 540; distinguished.



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Civil  Appeal No. 621 of
1973.
     From the  Judgment and  Order dated  13-3-1973  of	 the
Allahabad High Court in Spl. Appeal No. 9/73).
     V. J. Francis for the Appellant.
     O. P. Rana for the Respondent.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     PATHAK, J. This appeal by special leave arises out of a
writ petition  filed by	 a police  officer aggrieved  by the
termination of his services.
     The appellant  was a temporary Sub-Inspector of Police.
He was	posted at  Shahajahanpur in 1969. The Superintendent
of Police,
615
Shahjanpur commenced  disciplinary proceedings	against	 the
appellant on  the charge that he had violated Rule 29 of the
U.P. Government	 Servants Conduct  Rules, 1956	inasmuch  as
without prior permission of the Government he had contracted
a second  marriage in  November, 1964,	while his first wife
was alive.  The charge	was denied  by	the  appellant.	 The
Superintendent of  Police recorded  evidence.  But  at	this
stage the  Deputy Inspector  General of Police Bareilly made
an  order  on  March  12,  1970	 quashing  the	disciplinary
proceedings  on	  the  ground  that  the  offence  had	been
committed at  Pithoragarh, situated  in a  different  police
range, and  therefore  the  proceedings	 taken	against	 the
appellant were incompetent.
     Meanwhile, on  March 8,  1970, the Inspector General of
Police,	 Uttar	 Pradesh,  had	 issued	 a   letter  to	 all
Superintendents of  Police in  the State  directing them  to
submit	a   list  of  Sub-Inspectors  whose  reputation	 and
integrity were	very low  or who  were generally involved in
scandalous  conduct,  drinking,	 immorality  or	 other	acts
injurious to  the reputation  of the  Police service  or who
were involved  in encouraging  crime. The  Superintendent of
Police, Shahjahanpur  included the  name of the appellant in
the list  submitted by	him. On	 April 27,  1970, the Deputy
Inspector General  of Police  made an  order terminating the
services of  the  appellant.  The  order  recites  that	 the
services of the appellant, "are no more required and that he
will be considered to have ceased to be in service ....."
     The appellant  filed a  writ petition against the order
terminating  his   services,  and  claimed  that  the  order
contravened Article  311(2) of	the Constitution inasmuch as
it was	an order  imposing the	punishment of  dismissal  or
removal	 from  service	without	 satisfying  the  conditions
prescribed in  that provision.	It was also alleged that the
order was  passed mala fide. The writ petition was dismissed
by a  learned Single  Judge of	the Allahabad High Court. An
appeal was  dismissed by  a Division Bench of the High Court
on March 13, 1973.
     In the  appeal before us, it is urged for the appellant
that the  High Court  was wrong	 in holding  that the  order
terminating  the  appellant's  services	 was  not  an  order
imposing a  punishment. We  are referred to the disciplinary
proceedings instituted	against the appellant in 1969 and it
is submitted that although the order of termination does not
refer to those proceedings and the charge on which they were
commenced, the	appellant's services  were terminated with a
view to punish him for contracting a second marriage without
prior permission  of the  Government. We  are satisfied that
the contention	is without  substance. It is now settled law
that an order terminating the
616
services of  a temporary  Government servant  and  ex  facie
innocuous in  that  it	does  not  cast	 my  stigma  on	 the
Government servant  or visits  him with	 penal	consequences
must be regarded as effecting a termination simpliciter, but
if it  is discovered  on the  basis of material adduced that
although innocent  in its terms the order was passed in fact
with a	view to	 punishing the	Government servant,  it is a
punitive order which can be passed only after complying with
Article 311(2) of the Constitution. The scope of the enquiry
called for  in such a case has been outlined by one of us in
State of  Maharashtra v. Veerappa R. Saboji and another. But
the question which calls for determination in all such cases
is whether  the facts  satisfy the criterion repeatedly laid
down by	 this Court  that an  order is	not passed by way of
punishment,  and   is  merely	an  order   of	 termination
simpliciter, if	 the material against the Government servant
on which  the superior	authority has  acted constitutes the
motive and not the foundation for the order. The application
of the test is not always easy. In each case it is necessary
to examine  the entire range of facts carefully and consider
whether in  the light  of those facts the superior authority
intended to  punish the Government servant or, having regard
to his character, conduct and suitability in relation to the
post held  by him  it was  intended simply  to terminate his
services. The  function of  the court  is  to  discover	 the
nature of  the order by attempting to ascertain what was the
motivating consideration  in the mind of the authority which
prompted the order.
     In the  present appeal,  the appellant  was a temporary
Government  servant.  The  question  whether  he  should  be
retained in service was a matter which arose directly during
the drive  instituted by  the Inspector General of Police in
March,	1970  for  weeding  out	 police	 officers  who	were
unsuitable  or	 unfit	to  be	continued  in  service.	 The
Superintendent of  Police prepared  a list of Sub-Inspectors
functioning within  his jurisdiction,  and included the name
of the	appellant  in  that  list.  The	 material  which  he
considered was sufficient to lead to the conclusion that the
appellant, who	was a  temporary Government servant, was not
suitable  for	being  retained	  in  service.	His  general
character and  conduct led  to	that  impression.  There  is
nothing to  show that  the impugned order was made by way of
punishment. The	 circumstance that a disciplinary proceeding
had been  instituted against  him earlier does not in itself
lead to	 the inference that the impugned order was by way of
punishment. As	we have observed, that is a conclusion which
must follow  from the nature of the intent behind the order.
That intention can be discovered and proved, like any other
617
fact, from  the evidence  on the record. In this case, it is
not proved  that the  impugned order  was intended by way of
punishment.
     Learned counsel  for the  appellant relies	 on State of
Bihar &	 Ors. v.  Shiva Bhikshuk  Mishra and  State of Uttar
Pradesh & Ors. v. Sugher Singh. Both were cases of permanent
Government servants.  And as regards Regional Manager & Anr.
v. Pawan Kumar Dubey, to which also reference has been made,
that was  a case  where on  the facts  the Court  found that
there  were  no	 administrative	 reasons  for  the  impugned
reversion.
     The  appeal   fails  and	is  dismissed,	but  in	 the
circumstances there is no order as to costs.
S. R.					   Appeal dismissed.
618




