

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
State Of Tamil Nadu vs S.Shanumugham Chettiar & Anr on 22 September, 1980Equivalent citations: 1981 AIR  175, 1981 SCR  (1) 774
Author: O C Reddy
Bench: Reddy, O. Chinnappa (J)
           PETITIONER:
STATE OF TAMIL NADU

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
S.SHANUMUGHAM CHETTIAR & ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT22/09/1980

BENCH:
REDDY, O. CHINNAPPA (J)
BENCH:
REDDY, O. CHINNAPPA (J)
SARKARIA, RANJIT SINGH

CITATION:
 1981 AIR  175		  1981 SCR  (1) 774
 1980 SCC  (4) 487
 CITATOR INFO :
 D	    1981 SC 611	 (1)
 RF	    1983 SC 684	 (14)


ACT:
     Prevention of  Food  Adulteration	Act,  1954;  Section
16(1)(a) read  with Section  (i) and  2(i)(L)-gingelly	oil-
increase in  the Free Fatty Acid content-oil whether becomes
adulterated.



HEADNOTE:
     Under section  2(i)(L) (before  it was amended in 1976)
of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954, an article
of food	 is deemed  to be  adulterated "if  the	 quality  of
purity of the article falls below the prescribed standard or
its constituents  are present  in quantities  which  are  in
excess of the prescribed limits of variability".
     On	 November  1,  1969,  sample  of  gingelly  oil	 was
purchased by  the Municipal  Food Inspector from the shop of
the respondents. After completing the necessary formalities,
the Food  Inspector arranged  to send one part of the sample
to the	Public Analyst	for  analysis.	The  Public  Analyst
analysed the  sample on	 November 11, 1969 and reported that
it  contained  5.1%  of	 Free  Fatty  Acid  as	against	 the
permissible limit  of 3%.  On receipt  of  the	report,	 the
respondents  were  prosecuted  for  offences  under  Section
16(1)(a)(i) read  with	Section	 7(i)  and  2(i)(L)  of	 the
Prevention of  Food  Adulteration  Act.	 At  the  trial,  in
pursuance of the respondents request, another sample was got
analysed on  February 6,  1970 by the Director, Central Food
Laboratory.  According	to  his	 report,  the  gingelly	 oil
contained 6.2%	of the	Free Fatty  Acid and  was therefore,
adulterated.
     The District  Magistrate observing	 that the Free Fatty
Acid had  increased from  5.1% to  6.2% between November 11,
1969 and  February 6, 1970 and it was therefore, likely that
the Free  Fatty Acid content in the oil might have similarly
increased between November 1, 1969 when the sample was taken
and November  11, 1969	when the  sample was analysed by the
Public Analyst,	 held that  it was  not possible to say that
the prosecution	 had established  that on  the date when the
sample was  taken the  Free Fatty  Acid content	 of the	 oil
exceed 3%  and	acquitted  the	respondents.  The  order  of
acquittal was  confirmed by the High Court. In the appeal to
this Court, it was,
^
     HELD:1 (i) The judgments of the District Magistrate and
the High  Court are  set aside.	 The  second  respondent  is
convicted under	 Section 16(1)(a)(i)  and sentenced to pay a
fine. [780C]
     (ii) There	 was no	 justification for the conclusion of
the District  Magistrate and  the High	Court that  the Free
Fatty Acid  content of	the oil	 on the date when the sample
was taken  might have  been less  than 3%  and therefore not
adulterated. [780B]
775
     In the instant case, the Public Analyst report had been
superseded by the  certificate of the Director, Central Food
Laboratory, and the latter certificate had become conclusive
evidence of  the facts	mentioned in  it. The  sample,	must
therefore be  held, to	be adulterated. There was nothing in
the  evidence,	 nor  had   anything  been  shown  from	 any
scientific work which would suggest that the Free Fatty Acid
content would  so rapidly  increase in	the space  of  about
three months.  If it  was less	than 3%	 on November 1, 1969
when the  sample was  taken it	could not  have increased to
6.2% by February 6, 1970 when the sample was analysed by the
Central Food Laboratory. [777H, 778D]
     2. Gingelly  (Til or  Sesame) oil is a semi-drying oil.
It is  only after  Prolonged exposure  to air and light that
there may  be some  discernible chemical changes in gingelly
(Til or sesame) oil. [779G]
     New Encyclopaedia	Britannica, Vol.  13  pages  526-527
referred to.



JUDGMENT:
     CRIMINAL APPELLATE	 JURISDICTION: Criminal	 Appeal	 No.
115 of 1975.
     Appeal by	Special Leave  from the	 Judgment and  order
dated 10-1-1972	 of the Madras High Court in Crl. Appeal No.
64 No. 657/70.
     A. V. Rangam for the Appellant.
     A. T. M. Sampath for the Respondents.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     CHINNAPPA REDDY,  J.-On November  1, 1969,	 a sample of
gingelly oil  was purchased  by the  Food Inspector, Madurai
Municipality from  the shop  of the first respondent, who is
now reported  to be dead and against whom, this appeal, has,
therefore,  abated.  At	 that  time  respondent	 No.  2	 was
attending to  the business.  After completing  the necessary
formalities the	 Food Inspector arranged to send one part of
the sample to the Public Analyst at Madras for analysis. The
sample was  analysed by	 the Public  Analyst on November 11,
1969 and  it was  reported by  him that it contained 5.1% of
Free Fatty  Acid as  against the  limit of  3.0% permissible
under clause A.17.11 of Appendix B to the Prevention of Food
Adulteration Rules,  1955. In  his report  he also mentioned
that  the  sample  was	properly  sealed,  it  was  air-and-
moisture-tight and  packed in  thick paper so as to be proof
against light,	and, the  Free Fatty Acid content of the oil
would, therefore,  remain unchanged  for several  months. On
receipt of the Public Analyst's report a complaint was filed
against the  two respondents for an offence under sec. 16(1)
(a) and Sec. 7(i) read with sec. 2(i) (L) and Clause A.17.11
of Appendix  'B' to  the  Prevention  of  Food	Adulteration
Rules. Both the respondents denied the offence. The
776
second respondent  stated that	he  signed  on	the  various
documents produced  by the prosecution as he was asked to do
so by  the Inspector.  He did not read the contents of those
documents. The brother of the second respondent was examined
as a  defence witness  and he stated that he was in the shop
when the  Food Inspector came there and purchased the sample
and that at the time of the sale the Food Inspector was told
that the gingelly oil was not meant to be used as an article
of food but was meant for "oil bath".
     At the trial a request was made by the respondents that
another part  of the  sample which  had been produced by the
Food Inspector	in the	Court might be sent to the Director,
Central Food Laboratory, Calcutta, for analysis. It was sent
as desired. The sample was analysed by the Director, Central
Food Laboratory,  Calcutta on February 6. 1970. According to
his report  the gingelly  oil contained	 6.2% of  Free Fatty
Acid and was, therefore, adulterated.
     The learned District Magistrate, Madurai acquitted both
the respondents	 observing that	 the  Free  Fatty  Acid	 had
increased from	5.1% to	 6.2% between  November 11, 1969 and
February 6, 1970 and it was, therefore, likely that the Free
Fatty Acid content in the oil might have similarly increased
between November  1, 1969  when the  sample  was  taken	 and
November 11,  1969, when  the sample  was  analysed  by	 the
Public	Analyst,   Madras.  On	that  ground,  the  District
Magistrate held	 that it  was not  possible to	say that the
prosecution had established that on the date when the sample
was taken  the Free  Fatty Acid	 content of the oil exceeded
3%. The	 State preferred  an appeal to the Madras High Court
against the order of acquittal. The High Court confirmed the
order of  acquittal for the same reason as that given by the
District Magistrate.  The State	 has filed this appeal after
obtaining special  leave of  this Court under Art 136 of the
Constitution.
     Under Sec.	 2(i)(L) (before  it was amended in 1976) of
the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954, an article of
food is	 deemed to  be adulterated "if the quality of purity
of the	article falls  below the  prescribed standard or its
constituents are  present in  quantities which are in excess
of the prescribed limits of variability".
     Paragraph A.17.11	of Appendix  'B' to  the Rules	made
under the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act prescribes the
standard in  the case  of Til  oil (Gingelly or seasame oil)
and to the extent relevant it reads as follows:
	  ["A.17.11.-Til oil  (Gingelly or sesame oil) means
     the oil  expressed from  clean and	 sound seeds  of Til
     (Sesamum indicum),	 black, brown,	white, or  mixed. It
     shall be clear, free
777
     from rancidity,  suspended	 or  other  foreign  matter,
     separated	water,	 added	 colouring   or	  flavouring
     substances, or  mineral oil.  It shall  conform to	 the
     following standards:
     (a) Butyro-rafractometer reading at 40oC	.. 58.0 to
						   61
     (b) Saponification value			.. 188 to
						   193
     (c) Iodine value				.. 105 to
						   115
     (d) Unsaponifiable	 matter		    .. Not more than
					     1.5 per cent.
     (e) Free fatty acid as Oleic acid.	  .. Not more than
					     3.0 per cent.
     (f) Bellier test(Turbidity temperature- Not more than
	 Acetic acid method).		     22oC).] .]"
     Now, a sample of food purchased by a Food Inspector has
to be  divided by  him into  3 parts and each part has to be
marked, sealed	and fastened  separately. Before the Act was
amended in  1976, one part was to be delivered to the person
from whom  the sample was taken, another part was to be sent
for analysis to the Public Analyst and the third part was to
be retained with the Food Inspector to be produced by him in
case legal  proceedings were taken or it became necessary to
send it	 for analysis  to the  Director of  the Central Food
Laboratory. The	 Public Analyst	 was required  to deliver  a
report of  the result  of his  analysis and  this report was
ordinarily the	foundation of  the prosecution	by the	Food
Inspector. After  the institution  of the  prosecution,	 the
accused was given the right to request the Court to send the
third part  of the  sample retained by the Food Inspector to
the Director, Central Food Laboratory for a certificate. The
Director, Central  Food Laboratory  was required  to send to
the  Court  a  certificate  specifying	the  result  of	 his
analysis and  the certificate  of the Director, Central Food
Laboratory,  thereupon,	  superseded  the  Public  Analyst's
report. The  Public Analyst's  report, if  not superseded by
the Certificate of the Director. Central Food Laboratory and
the Certificate	 of the	 Director, Central  Food  Laboratory
might be used as evidence of the facts stated therein in any
proceeding under  the Act  with	 this  difference  that	 the
certificate of	the Director, Central Food Laboratory was to
be  final  and	conclusive  evidence  of  the  facts  stated
therein.
     In the  present case  the certificate  of the  Director
showed that  the sample	 of gingelly  oil contained  6.2% of
Free Fatty  Acid whereas  the permissible limit was 3% only.
We are	not concerned with the Public Analyst's report since
that has been superseded by the certificate of the Director,
Central Food Laboratory, and the latter certificate has been
made conclusive	 evidence of  the facts mentioned in it. The
sample, it must therefore be found, was adulterated.
778
     The sample,  as we	 mentioned  earlier,  was  taken  on
November 1,  1969, the analysis by the Public Analyst was on
November 11,  1969 and the analysis by the Director, Central
Food  Laboratory  was  on  February  6,	 1970.	The  learned
District Magistrate and the High Court thought that although
the Free Fatty Acid content in that part of the sample which
was sent  to the  Director, Central Food Laboratory was 6.2%
on the	date when the Director analysed the oil it could not
be said	 to have  been established that on the date when the
sample was  taken by  the Food Inspector the Free Fatty Acid
content exceeded 3%. According to them it could well be that
the Free Fatty Acid content increased due to natural causes.
We are	unable to  agree with  the lower  Courts.  There  is
nothing in  the evidence,  nor has anything been shown to us
from any  scientific work  which would suggest that the Free
Fatty Acid content would so rapidly increase in the space of
about three months that what was less than 3% on November 1,
1969, when  the	 sample	 was  taken  increased	to  6.2%  by
February 6,  1970, when	 the  sample  was  analysed  by	 the
Central Food  Laboratory. On  the  other  hand	in  the	 New
Encyclopaedia Britannica  Volume 13  (pages 526-527)  it  is
said:
	  "Fats can  be heated	to between  200o  and  250oC
     without undergoing significant changes provided contact
     with air  or oxygen  is avoided..	On exposure  to air,
     oils and  fats gradually  undergo certain	changes. The
     drying oils absorb oxygen (dry) and polymerize readily;
     thin  layers  form	 a  skin  or  protective  film.	 The
     semidrying oils  absorb oxygen more slowly and are less
     useful as	paint  oils.  Still,  sufficient  oxygen  is
     absorbed in  time to  produce distinct  thickening	 and
     some  film	 formation.  Oxidation	of  the	 drying	 and
     semidrying oils  is accelerated  by spreading  the	 oil
     over a  large surface.  On greasy	cloths, for example,
     oxygen  absorption	  may  proceed	 so   rapidly	that
     spontaneous combustion  ensues. The  nondrying oils, of
     which olive  oil is  typical, do not oxidize readily on
     exposure  to   air,  although  changes  do	 take  place
     gradually, including slow hydroysis (splitting to fatty
     acids and glycerol) and subsequent oxidation. This slow
     oxidation	causes	 a  disagreeable   smell  and  taste
     described by the term rancidity.
779
	  The chemical	reactions involved  in oil oxidation
     have been	studied	 widely,  when	oils  and  fats	 are
     exposed to	 air, little change takes place for a period
     of time  that varies from oil to oil depending upon the
     amount and	 type of  unsaturation and  the	 content  of
     natural antioxidants.  During this	 so-called induction
     period, there is virtually no change in either odour or
     chemistry of  the oil  because of the protective effect
     of	  natural   antioxidants,   especially	 tocopherol.
     Gradually, the  effectiveness of  the  anti-oxidant  is
     overcome and there is an accelerating rate of oxidation
     of unsaturated  acids, called autoxidation. Chemically,
     the   first   identifiable	  oxidation   products	 are
     hydroperoxides. These  break down	into a large variety
     of low-molecular-weight  aldehydes,  esters,  alcohols,
     ketones, acids, and hydrocarbons, some of which possess
     the  pungent,  disagreeable  odours  characteristic  of
     rancid fats.  In soyabean	oil exposed  to air  to	 the
     point of  incipient rancidity,  more than 100 different
     oxidation products	 have been  identified. Natural oils
     such  as	coconut	 oil,	with  very   low  levels  of
     unsaturation, are very stable to flavour deterioration,
     but the  more highly  unsaturated oils such as soyabean
     oil or  safflower oil  lose their flavour more quickly.
     Sesame oil	 is unique  in its flavour stability because
     of	 the   presence	 of   several  natural	antioxidants
     (sesamin, sesamolin,  sesamol). Synthetic	antioxidants
     such as propyl gallate, butylated hydroxyanisole (BHA),
     and butylated  hydroxytoluene (BHT)  have been  used to
     retard the	 onset of rancidity and increase the storage
     life of edible fats".
Gingelly (Til  or seasame)  oil we  may mention	 is  a	semi
drying	oil.   From  the   extract  from  the  Encyclopaedia
Britannica it  is only	after prolonged	 exposure to air and
light that there may be some discernible chemical changes in
gingelly (til  or seasame)  oil. In  fact it is mentioned in
the Encyclopaedia  Britannica that  seasame oil is unique in
its flavour  stability because	of the	presence of  several
natural antioxidants.  There is nothing to indicate that the
samples were not packed as required by the rules. The report
of the Public Analyst mentions "The sample has been received
properly sealed,  to be air and moisture tight and packed in
thick paper to be proof against access to light. Under these
conditions the Free Fatty Acid content of oils
780
remains unchanged  for several	months". The  certificate of
the Director,  Central Food  Laboratory mentions  "The seals
were intact".  We are,	therefore, clearly  of opinion	that
there  was  no	justification  for  the	 conclusion  of	 the
District Magistrate  and the  High Court that the Free Fatty
Acid content  of the  oil on  the date	when the  sample was
taken might  have been	less  than  3%	and  therefore,	 not
adulterated. We	 set aside  the judgments  of  the  District
Magistrate  and	 the  High  Court  and	convict	 the  second
respondent under  Sec. 16(1)(a)(i)  read with  sec. 7(i) and
2(i) (L)  of the  Prevention of	 Food Adulteration  Act	 and
sentence him  to pay a fine of Rs. 100 in default to undergo
simple imprisonment  for a  period  of	two  weeks.  We	 are
imposing  a   nominal  sentence	  having   regard   to	 the
circumstance that we are interfering with a concurrent order
of acquittal more than ten years after the commission of the
offence.
N.K.A.
781
