

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
The Commissioner Of Income Tax, ... vs Smt. P.K. Kochammu Amma Peroke on 23 September, 1980Equivalent citations: 1980 AIR 2124, 1981 SCC  (1) 241
Author: P Bhagwati
Bench: Bhagwati, P.N.
           PETITIONER:
THE COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX, KERALA

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
SMT. P.K. KOCHAMMU AMMA PEROKE

DATE OF JUDGMENT23/09/1980

BENCH:
BHAGWATI, P.N.
BENCH:
BHAGWATI, P.N.
VENKATARAMIAH, E.S. (J)

CITATION:
 1980 AIR 2124		  1981 SCC  (1) 241


ACT:
     Penalty, imposition  of-Assessee failed  to include the
income of the spouse and minor child in the return of income
for the	 assessment year 1964-65, though includible under s.
64(1) and  (iii)-Whether failure  entails penalty  under  s.
271(1)(c) of the Income Tax Act, 1961, as the unamended Rule
12 of  the 1961	 (prior to  31-3-1972) did  not provide	 any
column in  the prescribed  form-Income Tax  Act,  1961,	 ss.
2(45), 4, 5, 64(1)(i) and (iii), 139 and 271(1)(c) read with
Rule 12	 of the	 Income Tax  Rules, 1962, scope of-Words and
phrases "his income" meaning of.



HEADNOTE:
     The  respondent   assessee	 was   a  partner   in	 the
partnership firms  of  M/s.  Malabar  Tile  Works  and	M/s.
Malabar Plywood	 Works and  alongwith her  there were  other
partners including  her husband	 and minor  daughter. In her
returns for  the  assessment  year  1964-65  for  which	 the
relevant accounting  year was  the calendar year ending 31st
December, 1963,	 the  assessee	filed  a  return  of  income
omitting the  amounts representing the shares of her husband
and minor daughter in the partnership firms from her income.
The  Income  Tax  Officer,  however,  brought  the  amounts,
namely, Rs.  59,506 to	tax and referred the case for taking
action under  s. 271(1)(c)  of	the  Act  to  the  Assistant
Appellate Commissioner	who imposed a penalty of namely, Rs.
7,000 on  the assessee	for having  concealed her income. In
appeal the  Tribunal set  aside the order and the High Court
on reference affirmed the Tribunal's order. Hence the appeal
by Revenue to this Court after obtaining special leave.
     Dismissing the appeal, the Court
^
     HELD: (1)	The assessee,  in view	of the fact that the
prescribed form	 for filing  of returns	 under s. 139 of the
Act, prior  to 31st  March, 1972,  did not  contain separate
column to  show "income arising to spouse/minor child or any
other person  referred to  in Chapter  V of the Act", and in
view of	 the decision  of three	 Judges Bench reported in 74
I.T.R. 83  SC could not be said to have concealed her income
by not	disclosing in  the return  filed by  her the amounts
representing the shares of her husband and minor daughter in
the two partnership firms. [788B]
     (2) The  term  "his  income"  for	the  purpose  of  s.
271(1)(c) of  the Act, is "his income" which the assessee is
liable to  disclose for	 the purposes  of assessment and yet
fails to  do so. The return of income under s. 139(1) of the
Act is	required to  be filed in order to enable the Revenue
Authorities to	make a	proper	assessment  of	tax  on	 the
assessee. A  fortiorari, it  follows that  the assessee must
disclose in  the return every item of income which is liable
to be  taxed in his hands under ss. 4 & 5 of the Act. [785B;
F-H]
782
     (3) The  definition of  "total income"  in s. 2(45), no
doubt refers  to s.  5 which  lays down	 that all the income
profits and  gains accrued  or arisen  to  the	assessee  or
received by  or on behalf of the assessee shall be liable to
be included  in his  total  income  but	 this  provision  is
subject to  the other provisions of the Act and therefore if
the income  of any other person is declared by any provision
of the Act to be includible in computing the total income of
the assessee,  such income  would form	part  of  the  total
income exigible	 to tax	 under s.  4 of the Act. S. 64(1) is
one such  provision which  provides  for  inclusion  of	 the
income of  certain other  persons  in  computing  the  total
income of the assessee. [785F-H]
     Section 64(1)  makes it  clear that though the share of
the spouse  or minor  child in	the profits of a partnership
firm in which the assessee is a partner is not the income of
the assessee but is the income of such spouse or minor child
it is liable to be included in computing the total income of
the assessee  and it would be assessable to tax in the hands
of the assessee. The total income of the assessee chargeable
to tax	would include the amounts representing the shares of
the spouse and minor child in the profits of the partnership
firm. Obviously	 the words "his income" in s. 139 sub-s. (1)
must include  every item of income which goes to make up his
total  income	assessable  under   the	 Act.	The  amounts
representing the shares of the spouse and minor child in the
profits of  the partnership  firm  would  be  part  of	"his
income" for  the purpose of assessment to tax and would have
to be shown in the return of income filed by him. [786B-D]
     (4) It  is true  that the form of the return prescribed
by Rule	 12 of the Income Tax Rules, 1962 which was in force
during the  relevant assessment	 year did  not	contain	 any
separate column	 for showing  the income  of the  spouse and
minor child liable to be included in the total income of the
assessee, but  it did  contain a  Note stating	that if	 the
income of any other person is includible in the total income
of the	assessee under the provisions, inter alia, of s. 64,
such income  should also  be shown  in the  return under the
appropriate head. This Note clearly required the assessee to
show in	 the return  under the	appropriate head  of income,
namely, "profits  and gains  of business  or profession" the
amounts representing  the shares  of the  husband and  minor
daughter  of   the  assessee  in  the  profits	of  the	 two
partnership firms.  The assessee  however failed to disclose
these amounts  in the  return submitted by her and there was
plainly and manifestly a breach of the obligation imposed by
s. 139 sub-s. (1) requiring the assessee to furnish a return
of  her	 income	 in  the  prescribed  form.  To	 accept	 the
contention that	 despite the Note the assessee was still not
liable to  show in  the return	the amounts representing the
shares	of  her	 husband  and  minor  daughter	in  the	 two
partnership firms  would render	 the  Note  meaningless	 and
futile and turn it into a dead-letter
783
and that  would be  contrary to	 all  recognised  canons  of
construction. The assessee was guilty of concealment of this
item of	 income which plainly attracted the applicability of
s. 271 sub-s. (1) clause (c). [786G-787D]
     V.D.M.RM.M.RM.  Muthiah  Chettiar	v.  Commissioner  of
Income Tax, 74 ITR 183 (SC), doubted



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 1086 of
1973.
     Appeal by	Special Leave  from the	 Judgment and  Order
dated 8-12-1971 of the Kerala High Court in T.I.T. Reference
No. 91/69.
     S.	 C.   Manchanda	 and  Miss  A.	Subhashini  for	 the
Appellants.
     K. T.  Harindranath  and  T.  T.  Kunhikannan  for	 the
Respondent.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     BHAGWATI  J.-This	appeal	arises	out  of	 proceedings
initiated by  the Revenue authorities for levying penalty on
the  assessee.	The  assessee  is  a  lady  and	 during	 the
assessment year	 1964-65 for  which the	 relevant accounting
year was  the calender	year ended  31st December, 1963, the
assessee was  a	 partner  in  two  partnership	firms,	M/s.
Malabar Tile  Works  and  M/s.	Malabar	 Plywood  Works	 and
alongwith  her	there  were  other  partners  including	 her
husband and  minor daughter.  The assessee filed a return of
income for  the assessment  year 1964-65 showing Rs. 4754 as
income from  property and  Rs. 4748  as	 income	 from  other
sources. The  assessee stated in the return under the column
"Profits and  Gains of Business and Profession" against item
(b) which required share in the profits of a registered firm
to be  shown "Please  ascertain from  the firms'  files	 the
Malabar Tile Works and Malabar Plywood Works." The assessee,
however, did not show in the return the amounts representing
the shares of her husband and minor daughter in the firms of
M/s. Malabar  Tile Works  and  M/s.  Malabar  Plywood  Works
though they  were clearly  includible in computing the total
income of  the assessee	 under section	64  sub-section	 (1)
clauses (i)  and (iii)	of the	Income Tax  Act,  1961.	 The
Income Tax  Officer while making the assessment included the
amounts representing  the shares  of the  assessee's husband
and minor  daughter in the profits of these two firms in the
assessment of the assessee and taxed the assessee on a total
income of  Rs. 59,506  after including	these amounts. Since
the assessee  had not shown these amounts as forming part of
her total income in the return submitted by her, though they
were clearly  includible in  her total	income under section
64, sub-section	 (1) clauses  (i) and  (iii), the Income Tax
Officer was of the view that the assessee had con-
784
cealed the  particulars of  her income	and rendered herself
liable to  penalty under  section 271 sub-section (1) clause
(c), and  since the minimum penalty leviable on the assessee
was  Rs.  1000,	 he  referred  the  case  to  the  Assistant
Appellate Commissioner	who issued  notice under section 274
and after  hearing the	assessee, imposed  a penalty  of Rs.
1000. The  assessee appealed  to the  Tribunal	against	 the
order imposing	penalty and  one of  the arguments  urged on
behalf of  the assessee	 in support  of the  appeal was that
there was  no obligation  of the  assessee to  show  in	 her
return the  amounts representing  the shares  of her husband
and  minor   daughter  in   the	 two  firms  and  there	 was
accordingly no	concealment by her of the particulars of her
income so  as to  attract the penalty under section 271 sub-
section (1)  clause (c). The Tribunal accepted this argument
of the	assessee and  held that	 section 271 sub-section (1)
clause (c) could be invoked only if there was concealment of
the "particulars  of his  income by  the assessee"  and	 the
words "his  income" referred  only to  be the  income of the
assessee himself  and not  to the income of any other person
which might  be liable	to be  included in the income of the
assessee by reason of section 64 sub-section (1) clauses (i)
and (iii).  The Tribunal  accordingly held that the omission
or failure  of the  assessee to	 disclose in  her return the
amounts representing  the shares  of her  husband and  minor
daughter in  the two  firms as	forming part  of her  income
could not  be visited  with penalty  under section  271 sub-
section (1)  clause (c)	 and  in  this	view,  the  Tribunal
allowed the appeal and set aside the order imposing penalty.
This led  to the filing of an application for a reference by
the Revenue  and on  the application,  the Tribunal referred
the following  question of  law for  the opinion of the High
Court:
	  "Whether on  the facts and in the circumstances of
     the case,	the Tribunal is correct in law in cancelling
     the penalty levied under section 271(1)(c)?"
The High  Court took the view that the words used in section
271 sub-section	 (1) clause  (c) were  "his income"  and the
amounts representing  the shares  of the  assessee's husband
and minor  daughter in the two firms could not be said to be
the income  of the  assessee, though  in computing her total
income these amounts were liable to be included by reason of
section	 64  sub-section  (1)  clauses	(i)  and  (iii)	 and
therefore, the	assessee could not be said to have concealed
her income  when she  did  not	disclose  these	 amounts  as
forming part  of her  income in the return submitted by her.
The High Court accordingly answered the question referred to
it in  favour of  the assessee	and against the Revenue. The
Revenue thereupon  preferred the present appeal with special
leave obtained from this Court.
785
     There is  a decision of this court which is directly in
point and  it concludes	 the determination  of the  question
arising in  this appeal	 against the  Revenue but  before we
refer to  that decision, we might first examine the question
on principle  as a  matter of  pure interpretative exercise.
Section	 271   sub-section  (1)	  clause  (c)  provides	 for
imposition of  penalty on  an assessee	if it is found inter
alia that the assessee has concealed the particulars of "his
income." The  question is  what is  the scope and content of
the words "his income" occurring in this penal provision. Do
they refer  only to the income of the assessee himself or do
they also take in the income of others which is liable to be
included in  the computation  of the  total  income  of	 the
assessee by  reason of	the relevant  provisions of the Act,
such as	 section 64  sub-section (1)  clauses (i) and (iii)?
The answer  to this  question obviously	 depends upon  as to
what is	 "his  income"	which  the  assessee  is  liable  to
disclose for  the purpose  of assessment for concealment can
only be of that which one is bound to disclose and yet fails
to do  so. Section  139 provides  for filing  of a return of
income by  an assessee	and sub-section	 (1) of this section
lays down  that every  person whose  total income during the
previous year  exceeds	the  maximum  amount  which  is	 not
chargeable to  income tax,  shall furnish  a return  of	 his
income in the prescribed form and verified in the prescribed
manner, and  setting forth  such other particulars as may be
prescribed. The	 return of income is required to be filed in
order to  enable the  Revenue Authorities  to make  a proper
assessment of  tax on the assessee. It must therefore follow
a fortiorari  that the	assessee must disclose in the return
every item  of income  which is	 liable to  be taxed  in his
hands as  part of his total income. The charge of income tax
is levied  by section 4 on the total income of the assessee,
and 'total  income' is defined in section 2 sub-section (45)
to mean "the total amount of income referred to in section 5
computed in the manner laid down" in the Act. It is no doubt
true that the definition of 'total income' in Section 2 sub-
section (45)  refers to	 section 5 and this latter provision
lays down  that all  the income profits and gains accrued or
arisen to  the assessee	 or received  by or on behalf of the
assessee shall	be liable to be included in his total income
but this provision is subject to the other provisions of the
Act and	 therefore if  the income  of any  other  person  is
declared by  any provision  of the  Act to  be includible in
computing the  total income  of the  assessee,	such  income
would form  part of  the total	income exigible to tax under
section 4  of the Act. Now, section 64 subsection (1) is one
such provision which provides for inclusion of the income of
certain other  persons in  computing the  total income of an
assessee. Clauses  (i) and (iii) of this sub-section provide
that in	 computing the	total income  of an  assessee  there
shall be included all
786
such income  as arises	directly or indirectly to the spouse
of such	 assessee from	the partnership	 of the	 spouse in a
firm carrying  on a  business in  which such individual is a
partner as  also to  a minor child of such assessee from the
admission of  the minor	 to the	 benefits of the partnership
firm. It  is clear from this provision that though the share
of the spouse or minor child in the profits of a partnership
firm in which the assessee is a partner is not the income of
the assessee but is the income of such spouse or minor child
it is liable to be included in computing the total income of
the assessee  and it would be assessable to tax in the hands
of the assessee. The total income of the assessee chargeable
to tax	would include the amounts representing the shares of
the spouse and minor child in the profits of the partnership
firm. If this be the correct legal position, there can be no
doubt  that   the  assessee  must  disclose  in	 the  return
submitted by him, all amounts representing the shares of the
spouse and  minor child	 in the	 profits of  the partnership
firm in	 which he  is a partner, since they form part of his
total income  chargeable to  tax. The  words "his income" in
section 139  sub-section (1)  must  include  every  item  of
income which  goes to  make up	his total  income assessable
under the  Act. The  amounts representing  the shares of the
spouse and  minor child	 in the	 profits of  the partnership
firm would  be part  of "his  income"  for  the	 purpose  of
assessment to  tax and	would have to be shown in the return
of income filed by him.
     The assessee  then contended  that the return of income
which was required to be filed by her under section 139 sub-
section (1) was a return in the prescribed form and the form
of the return prescribed by rule 12 of the Income Tax Rules,
1962 did  not contain  any column  for showing the income of
the spouse  and minor  child which was liable to be included
in the	total income  of the  assessee under section 64 sub-
section (1) clauses (i) and (iii) and there was therefore no
obligation on  the assessee  to disclose  this income in the
return filed  by  her.	This  contention  is  also,  in	 our
opinion, fallacious  and deserves to be rejected. It is true
that the  form of the return prescribed by rule 12 which was
in force during the relevant assessment year did not contain
any separate column for showing the income of the spouse and
minor child liable to be included in the total income of the
assessee, but  it did  contain a  Note stating	that if	 the
income of any other person is includible in the total income
of the	assessee under	the provisions inter alia of section
64, such  income should	 also bestow in the return under the
appropriate head. This Note clearly required the assessee to
show in	 the return  under the	appropriate head  of income,
namely, "Profits  and Gains  of Business  of Profession" the
amounts representing the shares of the husband and minor
787
daughter  of   the  assessee  in  the  profits	of  the	 two
partnership firms.  But even  so,  the	assessee  failed  to
disclose these	amounts in  the return	submitted by her and
there was  therefore plainly  and manifestly a breach of the
obligation imposed  by section 139 sub-section (1) requiring
the assessee  to furnish  a return  of	her  income  in	 the
prescribed form.  It is difficult to see how the Note in the
prescribed form	 of the	 return	 could	be  ignored  by	 the
assessee and  she could	 contend that  despite the Note, she
was  not   liable  to	show  in   her	return	the  amounts
representing the shares of her husband and minor daughter in
the two	 partnership firms.  The contention of the assessee,
if accepted,  would render  the Note  meaningless and futile
and turn  it into  dead letter and that would be contrary to
all recognised canons of construction. There can be no doubt
that the  assessee was	bound to  show	in  her	 return	 the
amounts representing  the shares  of her  husband and  minor
daughter in  the two  partnership firms and in failing to do
so, she	 was guilty  of concealment  of this  item of income
which plainly  attracted the  applicability of	section	 271
sub-section (1) clause (c).
     It is  obvious that  on this  view the  order  imposing
penalty on the assessee would have to be sustained but there
is a  decision	of  this  Court	 in  V.D.M.RM.M.RM.  Muthiah
Chettiar vs.  Commissioner of  Income Tax  Madras  which  is
binding upon  us and where we find that a different view has
been taken  by a Bench of three Judges of this Court. It was
held in	 this case  that even  if  there  were	any  printed
instructions  in  the  form  of	 the  return  requiring	 the
assessee to  disclose the  income received  by his  wife and
minor child  from   a firm  of	which  the  assessee  was  a
partner, there was, in the absence in the return of any head
under which  the income	 of the wife or minor child could be
shown, no  obligation on  the assessee to disclose this item
of income,  the assessee  could not be deemed to have failed
or omitted  to disclose	 fully and  truly all material facts
necessary for  his assessment  within the meaning of section
34(1) (a)  of the  Indian Income  Tax Act,  1922.  With	 the
greatest respect  to the  learned Judges  who  decided	this
case, we  do not  think, for reasons already discussed, that
this decision  lays down the correct law on the subject, and
had it	not been  for the fact that since 1st April 1972 the
form of	 the return  prescribed by  rule 12 has been amended
and since  then, there	is a  separate column  providing the
"income arising to spouse/minor child or any other person as
referred to  in Chapter	 V  of	the  Act"  should  be  shown
separately under  that column  and consequently	 there is no
longer any scope for arguing that the assessee is not bound
788
to disclose  such income  in the  return to  be furnished by
him, we	 would have  referred the  present case	 to a larger
bench. But we do not propose to do so since the question has
now become  academic in view of the amendment in the form of
the return  carried out	 with effect from 1st April 1972. We
would therefore	 follow this  decision in Muthiah Chettiar's
case, which  being a  decision of a bench of three Judges of
this Court  is binding upon us, and following that decision,
we hold	 that  the  assessee  could  not  be  said  to	have
concealed her  income by  not disclosing in the return filed
by her	the amounts  representing the  shares of her husband
and minor daughter in the two partnership firms.
     We accordingly  dismiss the appeal, but in the peculiar
circumstances of  the present  case, we	 think that the fair
order of  costs would be that each party should bear and pay
its own costs throughout.
S.R.					   Appeal dismissed.
789




