

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Rajasthan State Road Transport ... vs Narain Shanker & Anr. Etc. Etc on 30 January, 1980Equivalent citations: 1980 AIR  695, 1980 SCR  (2) 866
Author: V Krishnaiyer
Bench: Krishnaiyer, V.R.
           PETITIONER:
RAJASTHAN STATE ROAD TRANSPORT CORPORATION, JAIPUR

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
NARAIN SHANKER & ANR. ETC. ETC.

DATE OF JUDGMENT30/01/1980

BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
PATHAK, R.S.

CITATION:
 1980 AIR  695		  1980 SCR  (2) 866
 1980 SCC  (2) 180


ACT:
     Motor Vehicles  Act 1939,	S. 110A	 and Constitution of
India  1950,   Article	41-Accident   claim-State  Transport
Corporation-Duty of.



HEADNOTE:
     The respondents  lost their  limbs in  a road  accident
while travelling  in a	bus belonging  to the  petitioner, a
nationalised transport	system. The  plea by the operator to
escape the liability for compensation was that the lights of
the bus accidentally failed, which resulted in the accident.
The Accidents Claims Tribunal negatived the plea and awarded
compensation in	 sums far  lower than  were claimed  by	 the
respondents.
     In the  special leave  petitions  to  this	 Court,	 the
petitioner contested the application of the principle of res
ipsa loquitur and the quantum of the claim.
     Dismissing the petitions,
^
     HELD: 1. (i) It was improper of the Corporation to have
tenaciously resisted the claim. [868 A]
     (ii) It  was right	 on the part of the Tribunal to have
raised a  rebuttable presumption  on  the  strength  of	 the
doctrine of res ipsa loquitur. [868 B]
     2. The  heads of  claim have been correctly appreciated
by the Tribunal and the awards have been moderate. [868 C]
     3. Instead	 of indulging  in  wasteful  litigation,  it
would have been more humane and just, if the Corporation had
hastened  compassionately  to  settle  the  claims  so	that
goodwill and public credibility could be improved. [867 H]
     4. The State has a paramount duty, apart from liability
for tort,  to make  effective provision	 for disablement  in
cases of  undeserved want-Article  41  of  the	Constitution
states so. [868 A]
     5.	 Nationalisation   of  road  transport	should	have
produced a better sense of social responsibility on the part
of the	management and drivers. One of the major purposes of
socialisation of  transport is	to inject a sense of safety,
accountability and  operational responsibility	which may be
absent in  the case of private undertakings whose motivation
is profit making regardless of risk  to life. [867 E-F]
     6.	 Common	 experience  on	 Indian	 high-ways  disclose
callousness and	 blunted consciousness on the part of public
corporations  which  acquire  a	 monopoly  under  the  Motor
Vehicles Act  in plying	 buses. It is a pity that State Road
Transport vehicles should become mobile menaces. [867 G]



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Special  Leave  Petition
(Civil) Nos. 6698-6700 of 1979.
867
     From the  Judgment and  Order dated  25-10-1978 of	 the
Rajasthan High	Court in  D. B. Civil Misc. Appeal Nos. 195,
196 and 197 of 1978.
     Soli J. Sorabjee Soli. Genl. and Sobhagmal Jain for the
Petitioner.
     M. N. Shroff for the Respondent.
     The Order of the Court was delivered by
     KRISHNA IYER,  J.-These  three  petitions	for  special
leave relate  to a  road tragedy where many lost their limbs
while travelling  in a	bus belonging  to  the	nationalised
transport system of Rajasthan. A flimsy plea was put forward
by the	operator to  escape liability  for compensation that
the lights  of the  bus accidentally  failed  and  thus	 the
unfortunate episode occurred. Other embellishments were also
set  up	 for  the  purpose  of	exoneration.  The  Accidents
Tribunal was  not  taken  in  and,  having  disbelieved	 the
evidence, awarded  compensation in  sums far lower than were
claimed by the victims.
     Two contentions  were raised and rightly over-ruled and
they have  been repeated  in the  Petition for special leave
and we similarly reject them. The nature of the accident and
the surrounding circumstances are such that the doctrine res
ipsa loquitur  was rightly invoked by the court. Indeed, the
terrible accidents  attributable  to  reckless	driving	 and
escalating year after year make our high-ways great hazards.
One  should   have  thought  that  nationalisation  of	road
transport would	 have produced	a  better  sense  of  social
responsibility	on  the	 part  of  the	management  and	 the
drivers. In fact, one of the major purposes of socialisation
of transport  is to inject a sense of safety, accountability
and operational	 responsibility which  may be  absent in the
case of	 private undertakings,	whose motivation  is  profit
making regardless  of risk to life; but common experience on
Indian	 high-ways   discloses	 callousness   and   blunted
consciousness on  the  part  of	 public	 corporations  which
acquire a  monopoly under  the Motor  Vehicles Act in plying
buses. It is a thousand pities that our State Road Transport
vehicles should become mobile menaces, and we should impress
upon them  the need to have greater reverence for human life
representing, as they do, the value-set of the State itself.
     In the  present case, the State Corporation put forward
a false	 plea and contested the application of the principle
of res	ipsa loquitur to avoid liability. It would have been
more humane  and just  if, instead  of indulging in wasteful
litigation, the	 Corporation had hastened compassionately to
settle the  claims so  that goodwill  and public credibility
could be  improved. After  all, the  State has	a  paramount
duty, apart
868
from liability	for tort,  to make  effective provision	 for
disablement in	cases of  undeserved want-Aritcle  41 of the
Constitution states  so. It  was improper of the Corporation
to have	 tenaciously resisted the claim. It was right on the
part of the Tribunal to have raised a rebuttable presumption
on the strength of the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur.
     The State Corporation has contested even the quantum of
the claim.  Indian life and limb cannot be treated as cheap,
at least by State instrumentalities. The heads of claim have
been correctly	appreciated by	the Tribunal  and the awards
have been moderate. Here again, the State Corporation should
have sympathised with the victims of the tragic accident and
generously adjusted  the claims	 within a short period. What
is needed is not callous litigation but greater attention to
the  efficiency	  of  service,	 including   insistence	  on
competent, cautious and responsible driving.
     We have had the advantage of Shri Soli J. Sorabjee, who
represented the	 Corporation with  a characteristic sense of
fairness, but  we are unable to desist from making the above
observations which are induced by the hope that nationalised
transport   service    will   eventually   establish   their
superiority over  the private system and sensitively respond
to the comforts of and avoid injury to the travelling public
and the pedestrian users of our highways.
     We dismiss the Special Leave Petitions.
N.V.K.					Petitions dismissed.
869




