

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Kusa & Ors vs State Of Orissa on 17 January, 1980Equivalent citations: 1980 AIR  559, 1980 SCR  (2) 801
Author: S M Fazalali
Bench: Fazalali, Syed Murtaza
           PETITIONER:
KUSA & ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF ORISSA

DATE OF JUDGMENT17/01/1980

BENCH:
FAZALALI, SYED MURTAZA
BENCH:
FAZALALI, SYED MURTAZA
KOSHAL, A.D.

CITATION:
 1980 AIR  559		  1980 SCR  (2) 801
 1980 SCC  (2) 207
 CITATOR INFO :
 R	    1987 SC  98	 (7)


ACT:
     Supreme  Court   (Enlargement  of	 Criminal  Appellate
Jurisdiction) Act 1970, S. 2 (a)-Scope.
     Indian Evidence Act 1872, S. 32(1).
     Dying  declaration-Evidentiary  value  of-Eye-witnesses
account	  inconsistent	  with	  dying	   declaration-Dying
declaration if could be relied upon.
     Dying declaration-Evidence	 of doctor that deceased was
in a state of shock-Inability of deceased to answer the last
question   of	 doctor-Whether	  invalidates	 the   dying
declaration.
     Dying declaration-Deceased	 naming some  other  persons
than accused-Such  persons not	challaned-Validity of  dying
declaration.



HEADNOTE:
     The appellants  along with	 other accused	persons were
tried under section 302/149 I.P.C. for causing murder of two
persons. While	one of	the deceased  died on  the spot	 the
other who  was removed to hospital, gave a dying declaration
to the	doctor before dying. The Sessions Judge finding that
none of	 the eye-witnesses  examined was reliable and as the
accused could  not  be	convicted  on  the  basis  of  their
testimony acquitted  all the  accused. He  further held that
the evidence  of the  eye-witnesses was	 rendered improbable
and was in fact falsified by the dying declaration Ex. 9. On
appeal by  the State,  the High	 Court held  that the  dying
declaration Ex.	 9 was	absolutely true and reliable and was
sufficient to establish the prosecution case. It accordingly
convicted and  sentenced the  appellants to imprisonment for
life.
     In the appeal to this Court, it was contended on behalf
of the appellants that (1) as the deceased was in a state of
shock, it  was unsafe  to rely on the dying declaration, (2)
as the	dying declaration  was incomplete  it could  not  be
acted upon,  and (3)  as the  deceased had  implicated	some
persons other  than the accused, the dying declaration could
not be said to be true.
     Dismissing the appeal,
^
     HELD: 1.  The High Court was right in holding that even
excluding  the	evidence  of  the  eye-witnesses  the  dying
declaration is true and reliable and sufficient to found the
conviction of the appellants. [808 F]
     2. The  Sessions Judge  committed an  error in  law  in
rejecting the  dying declaration  because if the evidence of
the eye-witnesses  was to  be rejected on the ground that it
was inconsistent  with the  dying declaration,	it would not
necessarily follow  that  the  dying  declaration  was	also
unreliable and unworthy of credence. [804 C]
802
     3. (a)  This Court	 has held that whenever a particular
view  taken   by  authors   of	Medical	  Jurisprudence,  is
adumbrated, the same must be put to the doctor to assess how
far the	 view taken by the experts apply to the facts of the
particular case. [805 G]
     In the  instant case though the doctor who had recorded
the dying  declaration had stated that the deceased was in a
state of  shock because	 he had received a serious injury in
the abdomen  which had	to be  stitched, he  was however not
crossed-examined as  to the  fact whether or not despite the
shock, the  deceased had  retained his	mental faculties. On
the other  hand, the  last certificate	given by  the doctor
towards the  end of  the dying	declaration that the patient
became semi-conscious  clearly shows  that the	deceased was
fully conscious when he started making the dying declaration
before the doctor. [804 H, 805 G]
     (b) A  perusal of	the entire dying declaration clearly
shows that  the doctor had asked all the necessary questions
that could  be asked from the deceased and the last question
"what more  you want  to say"  was merely in the nature of a
formality. Having narrated the full story, there was nothing
more that  the deceased could add. The dying declaration was
therefore not incomplete one. [806 B]
     Cyril Waugh v. The King, 54 CWN 503, distinguished.
     (c) Merely	 because some  other persons  named  in	 the
dying declaration  were not  challaned would  not by  itself
prove the  falsity of  the dying declaration. It may be that
these, persons were left out from the category of accused in
the F.I.R.  or the  challan due to ulterior motives. [806 E,
805 C]
     4. A  person on  the verge of death is most unlikely to
make an	 untrue statement  unless prompted or tutored by his
friends or  relatives. The  shadow of immediate death is the
best guarantee	of the	truth of  the statement	 by a  dying
person regarding  the causes or circumstances leading to his
death  which  are  absolutely  fresh  in  his  mind  and  is
untainted or  discoloured by  any other consideration except
speaking the truth. It is for these reasons that the Statute
(The Evidence  Act) attaches  a special	 sanctity to a dying
declaration. [808 B-C]
     5.	 It  is	 well  established  that  although  a  dying
declaration should be carefully scrutinised if after perusal
the Court  is satisfied	 that the  dying declaration is true
and is free from any effort to prompt the deceased to make a
statement and  is coherent and consistent, there is no legal
impediment in  founding	 the  conviction  on  such  a  dying
declaration even if there is no corroboration. [808 D-E]
     Khushal Rao  v. The  State of  Bombay [1958]  SCR 552,;
Tarachand Damu	Sutar v.  The State  of Maharashtra [1962] 2
SCR 775; Mannu Raja & Anr. v. State of M.P. [1976] 3 SCC 104
referred to.
     Ram Nath  Madhoprasad &  Ors. v. State of M.P. AIR 1953
SC 420, overruled.
803



JUDGMENT:
     CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 53
of 1974.
     From the  Judgment and  Order dated  2-11-1973  of	 the
Orissa High Court in Govt. Appeal No. 10/1971.
     Y. S. Chitle, and U. P. Singh for the Appellant.
     D.	 Mookherjee   and  B.	P.  Parthasarthi   for	 the
Respondent.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     FAZAL ALI	J.-This appeal	under s. 2(a) of the Supreme
Court (Enlargement  of Criminal	 Appellate Jurisdiction) Act
1970 is	 directed against  the judgment of the High Court of
Orissa	dated	2-11-1973  convicting  the  appellants	u/s.
302/149	 of   Indian  Penal  Code  and	sentencing  them  to
imprisonment for life.
     The appellants  along with	 other accused	person	were
tried before the Sessions Judge under s. 302/149 for causing
murder of  two	persons	 namely	 Ghansham  and	his  brother
Antarjami. The	Trial Court  after considering	the evidence
acquitted all  the accused  of the  charges  framed  against
them. Thereafter  the State of Orissa filed an appeal before
the High  Court against the order of acquittal passed by the
Sessions Judge	and  in	 the  said  appeal  the	 High  Court
reversed the  judgment of  the Sessions	 Judge so far as the
appellants were	 concerned and	convicted and sentenced them
as indicated above. Hence this appeal before us.
     The facts	of the	case are detailed in the judgment of
the High  Court and  it is  not necessary  for us  to repeat
them. It appears that shortly before the date of occurrence,
there was a partition suit between the parties in respect of
certain properties  enjoyed by	accused Banshi and Ghana. On
2-12-1968, according to the prosecution, the accused persons
armed with  lathis, Bhusas  and valies	came to the house of
the deceased  Ghansham and  called him	out.  When  Ghansham
opened the  door, the accused Banshi stabbed Ghansham on the
chest as  a result  of which Ghansham fell down and died. On
hearing the  alarm, the	 other deceased	 Antarjami  who	 was
brother of  Ghansham went  to  the  spot  and  he  was	also
assaulted by  the accused persons. This occurrence had taken
place near  about 7.00	a.m. F. I. R. was sent to Bramhagiri
Police	Station	  where	 it   was  lodged  and	a  case	 was
registered. After  the usual investigation, police submitted
charge-sheet against  all the accused persons who were tried
by the Sessions Judge with the result mentioned above.
     It appears	 that the  Trial Court after considering the
evidence of  the eye  witness examined	before it  came to a
clear finding that none
804
of the	eye witnesses  were reliable  and hence	 the accused
could not  be convicted on the basis of their testimony. One
of the main considerations which swayed with the trial Court
in coming  to this  conclusion was that in view of the dying
declaration-Ex. 9 made by Antarjami, the evidence of the eye
witnesses becomes  improbable, and is in fact falsified. The
learned	 Sessions   Judge   also   disbelieved	 the   dying
declaration as	it was	inconsistent with the oral evidence.
We might  mention here	that the Sessions Judge committed an
error of  law in  rejecting the dying declaration because if
the evidence  of the eye witnesses was to be rejected on the
ground that  it was  inconsistent with the dying declaration
then it	 would in  the circumstances  not necessarily follow
that the  dying declaration was also unreliable and unworthy
of credence.
     The High  Court while  endorsing the  findings  of	 the
Trial Court  that no  reliance could  be placed	 on the	 eye
witnesses appears  to have  founded the	 conviction  of	 the
appellants mainly  on the basis of the dying declaration-Ex.
9 recorded  by Dr. Mohanty on 3-12-1968 at the hospital. The
High Court  has given  cogent reasons  for holding  that the
dying declaration  is absolutely  true and  reliable and was
sufficient to  establish the  prosecution case	against	 the
appellants. We	have also  gone	 through  the  entire  dying
declaration-Ex. 9  very	 carefully  and	 we  find  that	 the
statement made	by Antarjami  is straight-forward, rational,
consistent and	absolutely coherent.  There appears  to be a
ring of	 truth in  the statement  made by Antarjami. Counsel
for the	 appellant has	fairly conceded	 that  there  is  no
evidence  whatsoever   to  indicate   that  there   was	 any
possibility of	prompting the  deceased to  make  a  tainted
statement. The dying declaration was attacked by the counsel
for the	 appellant on  three grounds. In the first place, it
was submitted  that as the deceased Antarjami was in a state
of shock,  it was  unsafe to  rely on the dying declaration;
secondly it  was contended that as the dying declaration was
incomplete, it	should not  be acted upon and thirdly it was
pointed out that Antarjami had implicated some persons other
than the accused also in the assault on him and his brother,
therefore the  dying declaration  could not  be said  to  be
true.
     So far  as the  first contention  is concerned;  namely
whether the  deceased was  in a	 state of  shock, it is true
that the  doctor who  had recorded the dying declaration had
stated that  the deceased was in a state of shock because he
had received a serious injury in the abdomen which has to be
stitched. The  doctor was  however not	cross-examined as to
the fact  whether or not despite the shock, the deceased had
retained his mental faculties. On the other hand; a
805
bare perusal  of the  dying declaration and the coherent and
consistent statement  made by  Antarjami clearly reveals the
fact that  the deceased	 was fully  conscious  and  was	 not
suffering from	any confusion or hallucination. The deceased
has clearly  stated the	 motive for  the  occurrence  namely
dispute about  the partition.  He has  also named  the	four
appellants and stated that he and his brother were assaulted
by  valies  and	 lathis	 and  it  is  not  disputed  by	 the
prosecution  that  the	appellants  were  armed	 with  these
weapons. It  is true  that while  naming the appellants, the
deceased has also named some other persons but the mere fact
that those  persons were not challaned does not detract from
the value  of the  dying declaration  because it may well be
that what  the deceased	 was saying was true and the persons
who were left out from the category of accused in the F.I.R.
or the challan may be due to ulterior motives.
     Dr. Chitale  however relied  on a	passage in  Taylor's
'Principles and	 Practice of  Medical Jurisprudence'-Twelfth
Edition particularly on the following passage:
	  'Assess very carefully the mental condition of the
     patient. When  shock ensues  upon violence,  especially
     when severe  loss of blood or some grievous head injury
     is leading	 to death, the intellect of the dying person
     becomes confused.	If the doctor observes any wandering
     or want  of clearness  in the  mind of  the patient, he
     must mention  it in  connection with  his evidence; but
     this does	not absolve  him from  his duty, although it
     should make  him particularly careful when interpreting
     his notes."
     We	 are   unable  to   place  any	 reliance  on  these
observations in absence of any question put to the doctor by
the accused  in his  cross-examination	regarding  the	view
expressed by  the author  regarding the state of mind of the
deceased. It  has been	held by	 this Court in several cases
that whenever  a particular view taken by authors of medical
jurisprudence is  adumbrated, the  same must  be put  to the
doctor to assess how far the view taken by the experts apply
to the	facts of the particular case. On the other hand, the
last certificate  given by the doctor towards the end of the
dying declaration  that the  patient became semi-unconscious
clearly shows that the deceased was, fully conscious when he
started making	the dying declaration before the doctor. For
these reasons  therefore, the  first  ground  taken  by	 the
appellant fails and is not tenable. As to the second ground,
namely that  the dying	declaration was	 incomplete, we	 are
unable to  accept this	contention because  we find that the
deceased
806
Antarjami could not answer the last question which was "what
more you want to say" because he became semi-unconscious and
was unable  to answer any further question. A perusal of the
entire dying  declaration would clearly show that the doctor
had asked  all the  necessary questions	 that could be asked
from the  deceased and	the last  question was merely in the
nature of  a formality.	 It is	obvious that having narrated
the full  story there  was nothing  more that  the  deceased
could add.  We are therefore unable to hold that the present
dying declaration  is an incomplete one. Reliance was placed
by the	counsel for the appellant in the case of Cyril Waugh
v. The King,(1)wherein it was held that no reliance could be
placed where  a dying  declaration was incomplete. Reference
to the	facts of the case would show that the statement made
by the	deceased was  really incomplete	 in as	much as	 the
deceased was  unable to	 complete the main sentence where he
was trying  to	describe  the  genesis	and  motive  of	 the
occurrence. The	 deceased in  that case	 stated as  "when he
fired the short, he missed the other man. The man has an old
grudge for  me simply  because.. ".  It is  clear  from	 the
statement of  the deceased  in that  case that	the deceased
wanted to  give the  motive for	 the  occurrence  and  other
relevant facts	which he  could not  say  before  the  dying
declaration was	 closed. This  case therefore  would have no
application to the facts of the case.
     As regards	 the last  contention that  the deceased had
implicated some	 other persons	also show  that it  was	 not
true, we  have already	pointed out that merely because some
other persons  were named  and not  challaned would  not  by
itself prove  the falsity  of the dying declaration. Finally
on  the	 question  of  law,  it	 was  argued  that  a  dying
declaration unless  corroborated should	 not be	 acted upon.
Reliance was  placed on a decision of this Court in Ram Nath
Madhoprasad &  Ors. v.	State of  M.P.(2). This decision, no
doubt, supports	 the contention	 of the	 appellant but since
then this Court has departed from the view taken in the case
referred to above and has held that if the dying declaration
is believed,  it can  be  relied  upon	for  convicting	 the
accused even if there is no corroboration.
 In Khushal	 Rao v.	 The  State  of	 Bombay,(3)  it	 was
pointed out  that s.  32(1) of	the  Evidence  Act  attaches
special sanctity  to a	dying declaration  and unless such a
dying declaration can be shown to be unreliable, it will not
affect its admissibility. It was further
807
held that  although a  dying declaration  has to  be closely
scrutinised, once  the Court comes to the conclusion that it
is true,  no  question	of  corroboration  arises.  In	this
connection, the Court made the following observations:-
	  "The Legislature  in its  wisdom has enacted in s.
     32(1) of  the Evidence  Act that "When the statement is
     made by a person as to the cause of his death, or as to
     any of  the  circumstances	 of  the  transaction  which
     resulted in  his death,  in cases in which the cause of
     that  person's  death  comes  into	 question",  such  a
     statement written	or verbal  made by  a person  who is
     dead  (omitting   the  unnecessary	 words)	 it  self  a
     relevant fact.  This provision  has been  made  by	 the
     Legislature, advisedly,  as a matter of sheer necessity
     by way of an exception to the general rule that hearsay
     is no  evidence and  that evidence,  which has not been
     tested by	cross-examination, is  not  admissible.	 The
     purpose of cross-examination is to test the veracity of
     the statements  made by  a witness.  In the view of the
     Legislature,  that	 test  is  supplied  by	 the  solemn
     occasion when  it was  made, namely, at a time when the
     person making the statement was in danger of losing his
     life. At  such a serious and solemn moment, that person
     is not  expected to tell lies and secondly, the test of
     cross-examination would  not be  available. In  such  a
     case, the	necessity of  oath also	 has been  dispensed
     with for  the same reasons. Thus, a statement made by a
     dying person as to the cause of death has been accorded
     by the  Legislature a special sanctity which should, on
     first principles, be respected.
	  ...		  ...	     ...	   ...
	  But in  our opinion,	there is no absolute rule of
     law, or  even a rule of prudence which has ripened into
     a	rule   of  law,	 that  a  dying	 declaration  unless
     corroborated by  other independent evidence, is not fit
     to be acted upon, and made the basis of a conviction."
     In this case this Court did not approve of the law laid
down in	 the earlier  decision which  is reported  in A.I.R.
1953, p. 420. To the same effect is a later decision of this
Court in  the case  of Tarachand  Damu Sutar v. The State of
Maharashtra(1) which  is a  decision rendered by five Judges
of this	 Court which  has also	taken the  view that  once a
dying declaration is found to be true, it can be
808
acted upon  without any	 corroboration. Thus, the view taken
by this	 Court by  the three  judges in	 A.I.R. 1953, p. 420
stands overruled  by this  decision. Same  view was taken by
this Court  in the  case of  Mannu Raja	 & Anr.	 v. State of
M.P.(1) which  has been	 relied upon  by Mr.  D. Mookherjee,
counsel for the State.
     There are a number of later decision of this Court also
to the	same  effect  but  it  is  unnecessary	to  multiply
authorities. It	 is thus manifest that a person on the verge
of death is most unlikely to make an untrue statement unless
prompted or tutored by his friends or relatives. In fact the
shadow of immediate death is the best guarantee of the truth
of the statement made by a dying person regarding the causes
or circumstances  leading to  his death which are absolutely
fresh in  his mind  and is  untainted or  discoloured by any
other consideration  except speaking  the truth.  It is	 for
these reasons that the Statute (The Evidence Act) attaches a
special sanctity  to  a	 dying	declaration.  Thus,  if	 the
statement of  a dying  person passes  the  test	 of  careful
scrutiny applied  by the  Courts, it becomes a most reliable
piece of  evidence which does not require any corroboration.
Suffice it  to say that it is now well established by a long
course of  decisions of	 this Court  that although  a  dying
declaration should  be carefully  scrutinised but  if  after
perusal of  the same,  the Court is satisfied that the dying
declaration is	true and  is free  from any effort to prompt
the deceased  to  make	a  statement  and  is  coherent	 and
consistent, there  is no  legal impediment  in founding	 the
conviction on  such a  dying declaration even if there is no
corroboration.
     For these	reasons, therefore,  we	 find  ourselves  in
complete agreement  with the  opinion of the High Court that
even excluding	the evidence of the eye witnesses, the dying
declaration is true and reliable and sufficient to found the
conviction of the appellant.
     For these	reasons therefore  the appeal  fails and  is
accordingly dismissed.
N.V.K.					   Appeal dismissed.
809




