

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Som Nath vs State Of Haryana on 31 March, 1980Equivalent citations: 1980 AIR 1226, 1980 SCR  (3) 280
Author: V Krishnaiyer
Bench: Krishnaiyer, V.R.
           PETITIONER:
SOM NATH

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF HARYANA

DATE OF JUDGMENT31/03/1980

BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
VENKATARAMIAH, E.S. (J)

CITATION:
 1980 AIR 1226		  1980 SCR  (3) 280
 1980 SCC  (3) 301


ACT:
     Indian Evidence  Act Section 32-Dying Declaration-Value
of.



HEADNOTE:
     The petitioner  was found guilty of burning his wife by
the Court  below. By  Special Leave Petition, the Petitioner
sought to discredit the dying declarations.
     Dismissing the Petition,
^
     HELD: Concurrent  findings of  fact cannot be disturbed
on enormity  of improbability.	The dying declarations under
Section 32  of the Evidence Act, are the groaning utterances
of a  dying woman in the grip of dreadful agony which cannot
be judged  by the standards of fullness of particulars which
witnesses may  give in	other situations.  To discredit such
dying declarations  for shortfalls here and there or even in
many places,  is unrealistic,  unnatural and unconscionable,
if basically there is credibility. [280E-G]



JUDGMENT:
     CRIMINAL  APPELLATE   JURISDICTION	 :   Special   Leave
Petition (Crl.) No. 3478 of 1979.
     From the  Judgment and  order dated  10-8-1979  of	 the
Punjab & Haryana High Court in Criminal Appeal No. 427/77.
     N.C. Talukdar,  J.P. Malhotra  and J.D.  Jain  for	 the
Petitioner.
     The order of the Court was delivered by
     KRISHNA IYER,  J., Wife  burning-that atrocious species
of murder  horrendously escalating  in some  parts  of	this
country-is the	shocking  crime	 proved,  according  to	 two
courts, by the prosecution in this case. Concurrent findings
of  fact   cannot  be	disturbed  save	  on   enormity	  of
improbability which  we are  unable to	see in	the  present
case. The  three dying	declarations corroborated  by  other
circumstances are  sufficient in  our view to bring home the
offence. Counsel  has sought to discredit these declarations
relevant under	s. 32  of the  Evidence Act  forgetting that
they are  the groaning	utterances of  a dying	woman in the
grip of	 dreadful  agony  which	 cannot	 be  judged  by	 the
standards of  fullness of  particulars which  witnesses	 may
give  in   other  situations.	To  discredit	such   dying
declarations for  shortfalls here  or there  or even in many
places	is  unrealistic,  unnatural  and  unconscionable  if
basically there	 is credibility.  The terrible	in this case
has taken  place in  the house	and in	the presence  of the
husband who has been convicted. We hardly see any reason for
interfering  with  this	 conviction,  and  would  have	been
shocked ourselves  if any  other  course  had  been  adopted
either by  the trial  court or	by the	High  Court.  Gender
justice has  a high  place in Indian criminal jurisprudence.
Dismissed.
N.K.A.					 Petition dismissed.
281




