

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
N. K. V. Bros (P) Ltd vs M. Karumai Ammal And Ors. Etc on 21 March, 1980Equivalent citations: 1980 AIR 1354, 1980 SCR  (3) 101
Author: V Krishnaiyer
Bench: Krishnaiyer, V.R.
           PETITIONER:
N. K. V. BROS (P) LTD.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
M. KARUMAI AMMAL AND ORS. ETC.

DATE OF JUDGMENT21/03/1980

BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
DESAI, D.A.

CITATION:
 1980 AIR 1354		  1980 SCR  (3) 101
 1980 SCC  (3) 457
 CITATOR INFO :
 RF	    1991 SC1769	 (6)


ACT:
     Motor Vehicles Act-Driver of bus acquitted for rash and
negligent driving- Civil suit if must also be dismissed.
     Indian Penal  Code-Section 304A-Requirement of culpable
rashness more  drastic than  negligence sufficient under the
law of tort to create liability.



HEADNOTE:
     The petitioner's  bus driven  by a	 driver hit an over-
hanging high  tension wire  resulting in  the death  of some
passengers and	loss of	 limb to  several others. The driver
was acquitted  on the  ground that the tragedy was an act of
God. The Accidents Tribunal held that despite the screams of
the passenger  about the  dangerous over-hanging  wire ahead
the rash  driver sped towards the spot which resulted in the
accident.  The	High  Court  affirmed  the  finding  of	 the
Tribunal that  the accident  had taken place due to rashness
and negligence of the driver and consequently the petitioner
was vicariously liable to pay compensation to the claimant.
     Dismissing the petition,
^
     HELD: 1.  The plea	 that the criminal case had ended in
acquittal and that therefore the civil suit must follow suit
was rightly  rejected by  the Tribunal	and the	 High Court.
[102 E]
     2. The  requirement of  culpable rashness under section
304A I.P.C. is more drastic than negligence sufficient under
the law of tort to create liability. [102 E]
     The Accident  Tribunal must  take special	care to	 see
that innocent  victims do  not suffer and drivers and owners
do not escape liability merely because of some doubt here or
some obscurity	there. Save in plain cases, culpability must
be inferred  from  the	circumstances  where  it  is  fairly
reasonable. The	 court should  not succumb  to niceties	 and
technicalities. [102 G]



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Special  Leave  Petition
Nos. 937-939 of 1980.
     From the  Judgment and  Order  dated  1-8-1979  of	 the
Madras High Court in A.A.O. Nos. 815-817 of 1977.
     T. A. Ramachandran and K. Ramkumar for the Petitioner.
     The Order of the Court was delivered by
     KRISHNA IYER, J.-Sri Ramachandran, ably assisted by Sri
K. Ram	Kumar, presented  the case  of	the  petitioner	 for
special leave, as persuasively as the facts permit but while
we were impressed with the
102
industry and  advocacy of  counsel, we heartily dismiss this
petition. Why  heartily? Because  the High Court, if at all,
has erred in favour of the petitioner, not against him.
     The Facts: A stage carriage belonging to the petitioner
was on	a trip	when, after  nightfall, the bus hit an over-
hanging high  tension wire  resulting in  26  casualties  of
which 8 proved instantaneously fatal. A criminal case ensued
but the	 accused-driver was  acquitted on the score that the
tragedy that  happened was  an act  of	God!  The  Accidents
Claims Tribunal,  which tried  the claims  for	compensation
under the  Motor  Vehicles  Act,  came	to  the	 conclusion,
affirmed by the High Court, that, despite the screams of the
passengers about  the dangerous over-hanging wire ahead, the
rash driver  sped towards  the lethal  spot. Some lost their
lives instantly; several lost their limbs likewise. The High
Court, after examining the materials, concluded:
	  "We therefore	 sustain the finding of the Tribunal
     that the  accident had  taken place due to the rashness
     and negligence  of R.W. 1 (driver) and consequently the
     appellant is  vicariously liable to pay compensation to
     the claimant."
The plea  that the  criminal case had ended in acquittal and
that, therefore,  the  civil  suit  must  follow  suit,	 was
rejected and  rightly. The  requirement of culpable rashness
under section  304A I.P.C.  is more  drastic than negligence
sufficient under  the law  of tort  to create liability. The
quantum of  compensation was  moderately fixed	and although
there was,  perhaps a  case for	 enhancement, the High Court
dismissed the cross-claims also. Being questions of fact, we
are  obviously	 unwilling  to	 re-open  the	holdings  on
culpability and compensation.
     Road accidents  are one  of  the  top  killers  in	 our
country,  specially  when  truck  and  bus  drivers  operate
nocturnally. This  proverbial recklessness  often  persuades
the courts,  as has  been observed  by us  earlier in  other
cases, to draw an initial presumption in several cases based
on the	doctrine of  res ipsa  loquitur. Accidents Tribunals
must take  special care	 to see that innocent victims do not
suffer and drivers and owners do not escape liability merely
because of  some doubt here or some obscurity there. Save in
plain  cases,	culpability  must   be	inferred   from	 the
circumstances where  it	 is  fairly  reasonable.  The  court
should not  succumb to	niceties, technicalities  and mystic
maybes. We  are emphasising this aspect because we are often
distressed by  transport  operators  getting  away  with  it
thanks to judicial laxity, despite the fact that they do not
exercise sufficient disciplinary control over the drivers in
the matter of careful driving. The heavy economic
103
impact of  culpable driving  of public	transport must bring
owner  and   driver  to	  their	 responsibility	  to   their
'neighbour'. Indeed,  the State	 must seriously consider no-
fault liability	 by legislation. A second aspect which pains
us is  the inadequacy of the compensation or undue parsimony
practised by  tribunals.  We  must  remember  that  judicial
tribunals  are	 State	organs	 and  Article	41  of	 the
Constitution lays  the jurisprudential	foundation for state
relief against	accidental disablement of citizens. There is
no justification  for niggardliness in compensation. A third
factor which  is harrowing is the enormous delay in disposal
of  accident   cases  resulting	 in  compensation,  even  if
awarded, being	postponed by  several years. The States must
appoint sufficient  number of  tribunals and the High Courts
should insist  upon quick  disposals so	 that the trauma and
tragedy already	 sustained  may	 not  be  magnified  by	 the
injustice of  delayed  justice.	 Many  States  are  unjustly
indifferent in this regard.
     We have  been  taken  through  a  few  intricate  legal
submissions by	counsel but  we decline	  to interfere under
Article 136  of	 the  Constitution  especially	where  human
misery is pitted against operational negligence.
P.B.R.					 Petition dismissed.
104




