

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Nanhu & Ors. Etc vs Delhi Administration & Ors on 5 August, 1980Equivalent citations: 1981 SCR  (1) 373
Author: V Krishnaiyer
Bench: Krishnaiyer, V.R.
           PETITIONER:
NANHU & ORS. ETC.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
DELHI ADMINISTRATION & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT05/08/1980

BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
PATHAK, R.S.
REDDY, O. CHINNAPPA (J)

CITATION:
 1981 SCR  (1) 373


ACT:
     Cycle-Rickshaw Bye-Law 1960-Bye-Law 3(1) Cycle Rickshaw
Drivers-Court Framing Scheme.



HEADNOTE:
     The Delhi	Municipal Corporation Which framed the Cycle
Rickshaw Bye  Law of  1960 under  section 481  of the  Delhi
Municipal Corporation Act, 1957 amended Bye-law 3 in 1976 to
provide that  'no person  shall keep or ply for hire a cycle
rickshaw in Delhi unless he himself is the owner thereof and
holds a licence granted in that behalf'.
     In writ petitions challenging the provision:
^
     HELD:
     In Azad  Rickshaw Pullers	Union Amritsar	& others  v.
State of Punjab & others, [1981] I SCR 366 a scheme had been
worked	out   to  help	 the  rickshaw	pliers	of  Amritsar
Municipality to become owners of cycle rickshaws. [374 A-B]
     2. The  Delhi Administration will effectively publicize
and notify  applications for  licences for  plying of  cycle
rickshaws and  all those  who apply  will be  considered  on
their merits  including length	of service as cycle rickshaw
pliers. The  criteria that  the	 Delhi	Administration	will
adopt must be reasonable and relevant. [374 D]
     3. On  the	 basis	of  reasonable	criteria  the  Delhi
Administration	 will	direct	 the   concerned   Municipal
authorities to	grant licences	for plying rickshaws and the
applicants so  chosen are  not	owners	themselves  all	 the
facilities indicated  in the Amritsar order will be extended
to such cycle rickshaw pliers fixing reasonable time limits.
[374F]



JUDGMENT:
     ORIGINAL  JURISDICTION:  Writ  Petition  Nos.  841	 and
728/1980.
		    (Under Article 32 of the Constitution.)
     R. S.  Sharma and	S. M. Ashri for the Petitioner in WP
Nos. 841 and 728/80.
     K. Parasaran,  So]. Gen].	B. P.  Maheshwari and Suresh
Seth for the RR in WP Nos. 841 and 728.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     KRISHNA IYER, J.-We have disposed of today applications
from cycle  rickshaw pliers of Amritsar Municipality where a
scheme has  been worked	 out to	 help them  become owners of
cycle rickshaws. A
374
similar scheme, says the Solicitor-General appearing for the
Delhi  Administration,	 will  be   extended  to  the  Delhi
territory. We,	therefore, annex  a copy  of the judgment in
Writ Petitions	Nos.  839  of  1979  and  563  of  1979-Azad
Rickshaw Pullers  Union, Amritsar  and others  v.  State  of
Punjab &  others and  Nanak Chand  and others  v.  State  of
Punjab and others, respectively to this judgment.
     There is  another problem	which arises  in  these	 two
cases and  that is  that the  Delhi Administration has put a
ceiling on  the total  number of cycle rickshaws permissible
to be  plied within its territory perhaps-we do not know for
certain-this number  may not  accommodate all the applicants
for cycle  rickshaws applying  licencees. We  are told	that
apart from  the applicants in this Court under Article 32 of
the Constitution,  there are  numerous petitioners  who have
approached the	High Court of Delhi under Article 226 of the
Constitution and  yet others  who have	filed suits in civil
courts for  the same relief. All that we can do is to accept
the suggestion	made by	 the learned  Solicitor-General that
the Delhi  Administration  will	 effectively  publicize	 and
notify	applications  for  licencees  for  plying  of  cycle
rickshaws and  all those  who apply  will be  considered  on
their merits  including length	of service as cycle rickshaw
pliers. The  criteria that  the	 Delhi	Administration	will
adopt must  be reasonable and relevant; otherwise it will be
open to	 the aggrieved	parties to  challenge the selection.
Likewise we  do not  want to  fetter the  rights of  parties
aggrieved if  the ceiling upon the total number of rickshaws
permissible within the Delhi territory is arbitrary.
     On	 the   basis  of   reasonable  criteria	  the  Delhi
Administration	 will	direct	 the   concerned   Municipal
authorities to	grant licences	for plying  rickshaws and if
the applicants	so chosen  are not owners themselves all the
facilities we  have indicated  in the Amritsar order will be
extended to  such cycle	 rickshaw pliers  fixing  reasonable
time  limits.  With  these  directions	we  dispose  of	 the
applications. Until  fresh licences  are issued by the Delhi
Administration and  the Municipal  authorities	the  present
petitioners will be allowed to ply their cycle rickshaws.
N.V.K.
375
