

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Bhupinder Singh vs Daljit Kaur on 13 November, 1978Equivalent citations: 1979 AIR  442, 1979 SCR  (2) 292
Author: V Krishnaiyer
Bench: Krishnaiyer, V.R.
           PETITIONER:
BHUPINDER SINGH

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
DALJIT KAUR

DATE OF JUDGMENT13/11/1978

BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
SHINGAL, P.N.
SEN, A.P. (J)

CITATION:
 1979 AIR  442		  1979 SCR  (2) 292
 1979 SCC  (3) 352


ACT:
     Criminal Procedure Code, 1973, Section 125 Scope of.



HEADNOTE:
     The respondent  obtained an  ex parte maintenance award
for a  sum of  Rs. 250/-  p.m. from  the Court	of competent
jurisdiction under  Sec. 125  Crl.P.C.	Subsequently,  as  a
result of a compromise between the parties and resumption
 of  cohabitation an  application was made by the respondent
praying that  her application  for maintenance	be dismissed
and the execution proceedings for recovery of maintenance be
withdrawn. Though the Trial Court did not proceed to recover
the arrears  of maintenance  it did not set aside the award.
As the respondent was betrayed, she proceeded to enforce the
order  for   maintenance.  The	 petitioner   resisted	 the
application on	the ground  that resumption of cohabitation,
after the original order for maintenance revoked the said
order. This  plea having  been rejected	 right	through	 the
petitioner came up by way of special leave.
      Dismissing the petition, the Court,
^
     HELD: the	Criminal Procedure  Code is  complete on the
topic and  any defence against an order passed under section
125 Crl.P.C.  must be  founded on  a provision	in the Code.
Section 125 b a provision to protect the weaker
 of the two parties, namely, the neglected wife. If an order
for maintenance	 has been  made against the deserter it will
operate until  vacated or altered in terms of the provisions
of the	Code itself, if the husband has a case under section
125(4)(S) or  section 127  of the  Code it ii open to him to
initiate appropriate  proceedings. But	until  the  original
order for  maintenance is  modified or cancelled by a higher
court or  is varied or vacated in terms of section 125(4) or
(S) or section 127, its validity survives. It is enforceable
and  no	 plea  that  there  has	 been  cohabitation  in	 the
interregnum or	that there has been a compromise between the
parties can hold good as a valid defence. [294G-H, 295A]
     A statutory  order can ordinarily be demolished only in
terms of  the statute. That being absent in the present case
the Magistrate	will execute  the order for maintenance [295
B] Fazal  Din v.  Mt. Fatima,  A.I.R  1932  Lahore  P.	115;
approved.
     Natesan Pillai  v. Jayammani, A.I.R. 1960 Madras, U. Po
Chein v.  Ma Sein  Mya, A.I.R.	1931 Rangoon,  89, Ampavalli
Veerabhadrudu v.  Ampavalli Gaviramma  1955 A.l.R. (Crl.) p.
244; over-ruled.



JUDGMENT:
     CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Review Petition No. 95
of 1978.
     K.R.  Nagaraja,  S.K.  Metha  and	P.N.  Puri  for	 the
petitioner.
293
     The order of the Court was delivered by
     KRISHNA IYER,  J.-A short	narrative of  the  facts  is
necessary to  explore and  explode  the	 submission  that  a
substantial question  of law  arises, which  merits grant of
leave under  art. 136 of the Constitution. The respondent is
the wife of the petitioner. She moved the Magistrate, having
jurisdiction  over   the  subject-matter,   for	  grant	  of
maintenance under  Sec. 125  of the Criminal Procedure Code.
The Court  awarded maintenance,	 in a  sum of  Rs. 250/- per
mensem but  the order was made ex-parte since the petitioner
did not	 appear in  court. The motion for setting aside the-
ex parte  order was  dismissed whereupon a criminal revision
was filed  by the  husband before the High Court. During the
pendency of  the said petition a compromise was entered into
between the  parties as	 a result  of which the wife resumed
cohabitation with  the husband.	 This resumption of conjugal
life was followed by an application by the wife (respondent)
praying that  her application  for maintenance	be dismissed
and the	 execution proceedings	for recovery  of arrears  of
maintenance be	withdrawn. Apparently,	on  this  basis	 the
trial  court   did  not	  proceed  to	recover	 arrears  of
maintenance. But  as the  record now  stands, the  order for
maintenance remains. That has not been set aside and must be
treated as  subsisting. The  High Court apparently dismissed
the revision  petition on  the score  that the	parties	 had
compromised the dispute.
     Later developments	 were not as smooth as expected. The
wife was  betrayed,  because  her  allegation  is  that	 her
husband is  keeping a  mistress making it impossible for her
to live	 in the	 conjugal home.	 Naturally, the proceeded to
enforce the  order for maintenance. This was resisted by the
petitioner  (husband)  on  the	ground	that  resumption  of
cohabitation, after  the  original  order  for	maintenance,
revoked the said order. This plea having been rejected right
through, the  petitioner has  come up  to this Court seeking
leave to appeal. The short question of law pressed before us
is that	 the order  for maintenance under section 125 of the
Code is superseded by the subsequent living of the wife with
the husband and is unavailable for enforcement.
     Counsel has relied on a ruling of the Madras High Court
in A.I.R.  1960 Madras 515. The holding in that case is that
resumption of  cohabitation puts  an end  to  the  order  of
maintenance. The learned Judge observed:
	  "on the  authority of	 the above  decisions I must
     hold in  this case	 that there  was a  reunion for some
     time and that put ran end to the order under S. 488 Cr.
     P. C.  If the  wife separated  again from	the husband,
     then she must file another peti-
294
     tion, a  fresh cause  of action, and obtain an order if
     she satisfied the Court that there is sufficient reason
     to leave  her husband and that he neglected to maintain
     her."
     To the  same effect  is the decision of the Andhra High
Court reported	in 1955	 Andhra Law Times Reports (Criminal)
Page 244. The head note there leads
	  "If  a   wife	 who   has  obtained   an  order  of
     maintenance under	Sec. 488  rejoins  her	husband	 and
     lives with	 him, the  order is  revoked and  cannot  be
     enforced subsequently, if they fall out again. If there
     are fresh	grounds" such as would entitle her to obtain
     maintenance under	Section 488,  it is  open to  her to
     invoke the	 jurisdiction of  court once  again for	 the
     same relief."
     An earlier	 Rangoon case  (A.I.R. 1931  Rangoon 89)  as
lends support to this proposition.
     A contrary	 position has  found favour  with the Lahore
High Court  reported in A.I.R. 1932 Lahore p. 115. The facts
of that	 case have  close, similarity to the present one and
the head-note  brings out the ratio with sufficient clarity.
It reads:
     Shadi Lal, C. J. observed:
	  Now,	in  the	 present  case	the  compromise,  as
     pointed out  above, was  made out of Court and no order
     under S.  488, Criminal  P. C. was made in pursuance of
     that compromise,  Indeed, the  order of  the Magistrate
     allowing maintenance  at the  rate of Rs. 10 per mensem
     was neither  rescinded nor	 modified, and no ground has
     been shown	 why that  order should	 not be enforced. If
     the husband  places his  reliance upon the terms of the
     compromise, he  may have  recourse to  such remedy in a
     civil Court  as may  be open to him. The criminal Court
     can not  however take  cognizance of the compromise and
     refuse to enforce the order made by it."
This reasoning of the learned Chief Justice appeals to us.
     We are  concerned with  a Code which is complete on the
topic and  any defence against an order passed under section
125 Cr1.  P. C.	 must be founded on a provision in the Code.
Section 125  is a provision to protect the weaker of the two
parties,  namely,  the	neglected  wife.  If  an  order	 for
maintenance has	 been made  against  the  deserter  it	will
operate until  vacated or altered in terms of the provisions
of the	Code itself. If the husband has a case under section
125 (4)	 (5) or section 127 of the Code it is open to him to
initiate appropriate proceedings.
295
But until  the original order for maintenance is modified or
cancelled by a higher court or is varied or vacated in terms
of section  125(4) or  (5)  ar	section	 127,  its  validity
survives. It  is enforceable and no plea that there has been
cohabitation in	 the interregnum  or that  there has  been a
compromise between  the parties	 can hold  good as  a  valid
defence. In  this view,	 we hold  that the  decisions  cited
before us  in favour of the proposition contended for by the
petitioner are	not good  law and that the view taken by Sir
Shadi Lal Chief Justice is sound.
     A statutory  order can ordinarily be demolished only in
terms of  the statute. That being absent in the present case
the Magistrate	will execute  the order for maintenance. Our
order does  not and  shall not	be deemed  to prejudice	 the
petitioner in  any proceedings	under the  law which  he may
start to vacate or vary the order for maintenance.
S.R.					 Petition dismissed.
296




