

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Chief Commissioner Union ... vs Sialkot Silk Stores, Chandigarh on 23 October, 1978Equivalent citations: 1979 AIR  435, 1979 SCR  (2) 134
Author: N Untwalia
Bench: Untwalia, N.L.
           PETITIONER:
CHIEF COMMISSIONER UNION TERRITORY, CHANDIGARH

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
SIALKOT SILK STORES, CHANDIGARH

DATE OF JUDGMENT23/10/1978

BENCH:
UNTWALIA, N.L.
BENCH:
UNTWALIA, N.L.
CHANDRACHUD, Y.V. ((CJ)
SHINGAL, P.N.

CITATION:
 1979 AIR  435		  1979 SCR  (2) 134
 1979 SCC  (1) 255


ACT:
     Punjab  General   Sales  Tax   Act,   1948-S.   6-State
Government issued  a notification  of its intention to amend
Schedule but  did not  issue a	second notification amending
the Schedule  as required  by s.  6-State reorganised in the
meanwhile and  the Union  Territory  of	 Chandigarh  formed-
Earlier notification  if "law  in force"-Newly	formed Union
Territory-If could  avail of  the earlier  notification	 and
amend the schedule.



HEADNOTE:
     Section 6	of the	Punjab General	Sales Tax  Act, 1948
provides  that	 the  State   Government,  after  giving  by
notification, not  less than  three months'  notice  of	 its
intention so  to do, may, by like notification add or delete
from Schedule  and thereupon  Schedule shall be deemed to be
amended accordingly.
     The State	Government of  the composite State of Punjab
issued a  notification under  s. 6  giving its	intention to
delete from  Schedule pure  silken fabrics  from the list of
tax-free  goods.   Before   the	  issue	  of   any   further
notification, however,	the composite  State was reorganised
and the	 Union	Territory  of  Chandigarh  was	formed.	 The
Government of  the Union  Territory of	Chandigarh issued  a
notification amending  item 30 of Schedule as intended to be
amended by the notification issued by the former government.
     In a  writ petition  filed before	the High  Court	 the
respondent challenged  the notification	 as invalid  on	 the
ground that the earlier notification could not be availed of
by the new Government for amending Schedule B. The appellant
claimed that  the earlier  notification was  "law in force".
But the	 High Court  repelled this  argumenet It allowed the
respondent's writ
     Dismissing the appeal,
^
     HELD: 1. There was no "law in force" enabling the newly
formed Union  'Territory of Chandigarh to levy any sales tax
on pure silken fabrics.
     2. The  notification merely  notifying the intention of
the State  Government to  add or  delete from  Schedule	 any
article by  itself had	no force of law until and unless, on
the  expiry   of  the	period	of   three  months,  a	like
notification was issued amending the Schedule. The erstwhile
State Government  of  Punjab  could  not  issue	 the  second
notification in	 respect of  the Union	Territory  after  it
ceased to  be a part of the State of Punjab. Sales Tax could
not be	charged on  pure silken	 fabrics by  the said  State
Government merely  by virtue  of the  notification.  It	 was
therefore not  a law  in force	when the composite State was
reorganised. [136D-E]
135
     3. No  provision is to be found in the Act to show that
by a  legal fiction  the A  first notification	of intention
issued by  the erstwhile State Government could be deemed to
be a notification issued by the new Government. [137 B]
     M/s. Rattan  Lal  and  Co.	 and  another  etc.  v.	 The
Assessing Authority,  Patiala and another, etc. AIR 1970 S.C
1742 held inapplicable.



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Civil  Appeal No. 364 of
1969.
     From the  Judgment and  order  dated  7-8-1968  of	 the
Punjab and Haryana High Court in Civil Writ No. 2199/68.
     S. N. Anand and R. N. Sachthey for the Appellant.
     Arvind Minocha for the Respondent.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     UNTWALIA, J.  The Chief  Commissioner, Union Territory,
Chandigarh, has	 preferred this	 appeal by  certificate from
the decision  of the High Court of Punjab & Haryana allowing
the Writ  Petition  of	the  respondent	 and  declaring	 the
amendment of item 30 in Schedule to the Punjab General Sales
Tax Act, 1948, hereinafter referred to as the Act, invalid.
     The composite and the then existing State of Punjab was
re-organised  by   the	Punjab	Re-organisation	 Act,  1966,
Central Act  31 of  1966. The  Union Territory of Chandigarh
was carved  out as one of the States on and from November 1,
1966. Under  section 6	of the Act no tax was payable on the
sale of	 goods specified in Schedule B. The State Government
could amend this Schedule and at the relevant time the power
so conferred  on the  State Government	was in the following
terms:-
	  "The State Government after giving by notification
     not less  than three months' notice of its intention so
     to do  may, by  like notification	add or	delete	from
     Schedule and  there upon Schedule shall be deemed to be
     amended accordingly."
Item 30 of Schedule exempted from sales tax:
	  "All	varieties   of	cotton,	 woollen  or  silken
     textiles, including  rayon, artificial  silk or  nylon,
     whether  manufactured   by	 handloom  or  powerloom  or
     otherwise,	 but   not  including  car  pets,  druggets,
     woollen durees and cotton floor durees."
     On	 August	  24,  1966  the  State	 Government  of	 the
composite State of Punjab issued a notification giving three
months' notice of its intention to amend Schedule to exclude
pure silken  fabrics from  the list  of tax; free goods. But
before the expiry of three months and before
136
any further  notification  could  be  issued  by  the  State
Government as  required by  section 6  of the Act, the Union
Territory of  Chandigarh came  into existence on November 1,
1966.  The  Government	of  the	 Union	Territory  issued  a
notification dated  January 4,	1968  amending	item  30  as
intended to  be amended	 by the	 notification  dated  August
24,1966 issued	by the	State Government  of  the  composite
State of Punjab. The respondent filed a writ petition in the
High Court challenging this notification as being invalid on
the ground  that  the  earlier	notification  could  not  be
availed of  by the  new Government  for amending Schedule B.
The stand  taken on  behalf of	the appellant  was that	 the
earlier notification was a "law in force" within the meaning
of section  88 of  Central Act	31 of  1966. The  High Court
repelled this argument, and in our opinion, rightly.
     It is  plain on  the wordings  of section 6 of the Act,
extracted above,  that a  notification merely  notifying the
intention of  the State	 Government to	add or	delete	from
Schedule any  article, by  itself, had no force of law until
and unless  on the  expiry of  the period  of three months a
like notification  was issued  amending	 the  Schedule.	 The
erstwhile State	 Government of	Punjab	could  not  issue  a
second notification  in respect of the Union Territory after
it ceased  to be  a part  of the  State of Punjab. Sales tax
could not  be charged  on pure	silken fabrics	by the	said
State Government on October 31, 1966 merely by virtue of the
notification dated August 24, 1966. It was, therefore, not a
law in	force when  the composite  State  was  re-organised.
Section 88  of the  Punjab Re-organisation Act, 1966 runs as
follows:-
	  "The- provisions of Part II shall not be deemed to
     have f  effected any change in the territories to which
     any law  in force	immediately before the appointed day
     extends or	 applies, and  territorial references in any
     such law  to the State of Punjab shall, until otherwise
     provided  by   a  competent   .  Legislature  or  other
     competent	authority,   be	 construed  as	meaning	 the
     territories within	 that State  immediately before	 the
     appointed day."
It is  clear that  there was  no law in force on November 1,
1966, which  could enable  the Union  Territory to  levy any
sales tax on pure silken fabrics.
     Mr. S.  N. Anand  endeavoured to attack the judgment of
the High  Court by taking a new stand in this Court that the
notification dated  August  24,	 1966  could  enure  to	 the
benefit	 of   and  be	availed	 by  the    Union  Territory
Government. But	 he failed  to point  out any provision L in
Act 31	of 1966	 or  any  other	 law  to  substantiate	this
argument. No
137
"deeming" provision could be brought to our notice, as there
is none,  to  show  that  the  notification  issued  by	 the
erstwhile State	 Government of	Punjab could be deemed to be
one issued by the new Government of the Union Territory. For
many  other  purposes  there  are  "deeming"  provisions  in
Central Act  31 of  1966 e.g.  sections 59(1), 74(1) and 92.
But no	provision is  to be  found to  show that  by a legal
fiction the  first notification	 of intention  issued by the
erstwhile  State   Government  could   be  deemed  to  be  a
notification issued  by the  new Government.  'The  argument
thus presented by Mr. Anand must be rejected.
     Learned counsel  for the appellant placed reliance upon
the principle of law enunciated in paragraph 12 at page 1749
in the	decision of this Court in M/s. Ratan Lal and Co. and
another	 etc.,	v.  The	 Assessing  Authority,	Patiala	 and
another, etc.(1).  The principle  stated therein is that the
new legislature	 of the	 new State after the re-organisation
of  the	  composite  State  could  amend  the  existing	 law
retrospectively	 from	a  date	 anterior  to  the  date  of
reorganisation. Obviously the view expressed in the decision
aforesaid is so very different that it cannot be of any help
to the appellant in this case.
     For the  reasons stated  above, we	 dismiss the  appeal
with costs.
P.B.R.					   Appeal dismissed.
     (1) A.I.R. 1970 S.C., 1742
10-817SCI/78
138




