

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Inder Singh & Anr vs The State (Delhi Admn.) on 24 February, 1978Equivalent citations: 1978 AIR 1091, 1978 SCR  (3) 393
Author: V Krishnaiyer
Bench: Krishnaiyer, V.R.
           PETITIONER:
INDER SINGH & ANR.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
THE STATE (DELHI ADMN.)

DATE OF JUDGMENT24/02/1978

BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
SINGH, JASWANT

CITATION:
 1978 AIR 1091		  1978 SCR  (3) 393
 1978 SCC  (1) 161


ACT:
Proof-Nature  of  Proof	 and  credibility  of  testimony  in
criminal  cases-Constitution of India, 1950 Art. 21-Duty  of
the  Court in giving directions in criminal cases to  ensure
that  deprivation  of  liberty is  accompanied	by  curative
strategy and human dignity.
Criminal  Procedure Code, (Act II of 1974) 1973-Ss.  149  to
151-Police  to	prevent	 cognizable  offences-Their   duties
reiterated.



HEADNOTE:
The  petitioners aged 16 and 20 were convicted for  offences
u/s  302 read with s. 34 and s. 307 I.P.C. and sentenced  to
life  imprisonment  by the trial Court and  the	 High  Court
affirmed both the conviction and the sentence awarded to the
accused.
Dismissing the special leave petition, the Court
HELD:	  1.	Credibility   of   testimony,	 oral	 and
circumstantial,	  depends   considerably   on	a   judicial
evaluation of the totality, not isolated scrutiny.  While it
is  necessary that proof beyond reasonable doubt  should  be
adduced	 in all criminal cases, it is not necessary that  it
should	be  perfect.   Proof beyond reasonable	doubt  is  a
guideline, not a fetish and guilty man cannot get away	with
it  because  truth  suffers some  infirmity  when  projected
through	 human processes.  Judicial uestq for perfect  proof
often  accounts	 for  police  presentation  of	 fool-proof-
concoction.   Infirmity	 in  some aspect or  other  of	this
prosecution case cannot invalidate the culpability which  is
otherwise veraciously made out. [394 D-F]
The  rationale of Court sentence is social  defence  coupled
with personal correction.  Article 21 of the Constitution is
the  jurisdictional root for legal liberalism.	 Courts	 are
responsible  to	 ensure	 that  deprivation  of	liberty	  is
accompanied  by	 curative  strategy and	 human	dignity,  by
issuing certain positive directions in this regard. [397 B]
The  Court  directed  the  State  Government  (a)  to  issue
appropriate instructions to the jail authorities to give the
prisoners treatment and work which are not likely to  offend
dignity	 and decency and if necessary in  consultation	with
the   medical	officer;  (b)  If  their   behaviour   shows
responsibility	and trustworthiness, to allow  them  liberal
and  cautious  parole  so  that their  family  ties  may  be
maintained and inner tensions may not further build up;	 (c)
To enlarge them on parole for two months after every period-
of  one year, (d) to afford interviews by family members  as
often  as  are sought, and (e) to teach them  useful  crafts
inside	prison and encourage their studies.  The Court	fur-
ther  directed	the Sessions Judge to make  jail  visits  to
ensure	compliance with the above directions. [396 G-H,	 397
A]
OBSERVATION:
Criminology  is	 more  than police "billy"  and	 "peace	 and
order"	is more than smart F.I.R. It is positive action	 for
prevention. detection and prompt prosecution. [395 G]
[The  Court reiterated the preventive action of	 the  police
u/ss.  149  to	151 contained in Ch.   XI  of  the  Criminal
Procedure Code, 1973 "which duty has gone by default']
394



JUDGMENT:
CRIMINAL  APPELLATE  JURISDICTION : Special  Leave  Petition
(Criminal) No. 238 of 1978.
(Appeal by Special from the Judgment and Order dt.  16-12-77
of the Delhi High Court in Crl.	 A. No. 135 of 1975).
Frank  Anthony,	 Chaman Lal Itorara and O. P. Soni  for	 the
Petitioners.
The Order of the Court was delivered by
KRISHNA	 IYER, J.-Mr. Frank Anthony has argued	elaborately,
punctuated with strident emphasis, several points in support
of the innocence of the petitioners who have been  convicted
under  s.  302 read with S. 34 and s. 307  I.P.C.  The	High
Court has affirmed the conviction entered by the trial court
and sentences of life imprisonment have been awarded by both
the courts for both the accused.  Certainly, some persuasive
factors,  which may militate against the culpability of	 the
accused and the prosecution version of the precise nature of
the  occurrence, were brought to our notice by	counsel	 who
also  strongly	urged  that there  were	 embellishments	 and
improbabilities	 invalidating the conviction.  We  have	 had
the   advantage	 of  pursuing  the  extensively	  spread-out
judgment  of  the High Court, in the light of  the  critical
arguments  addressed, but remain unconvinced that  there  is
any serious error which warrants grant of leave.
Credibility  of testimony, oral and circumstantial,  depends
considerably  on a judicial evaluation of the totality,	 not
isolated scrutiny.  While it is necessary that proof  beyond
reasonable doubt should be adduced in all criminal cases, it
is not necessary that it should be perfect.  If	 a  case  is
proved	too perfectly, it is argued that it  is	 artificial;
if  a case has some flaws, inevitable because  human  beings
are  prone to err, it is argued that it is,  too  imperfect.
One  wonders whether in the meticulous	hypersensitivity  to
eliminate a rare innocent from being punished, many,  guilty
men  must  be  callously allowed to  escape.   Proof  beyond
reasonable doubt is a guideline, not a fetish and guilty man
cannot	away  with it because truth suffers  some  infirmity
when projected through human processes.	 Judicial quest	 for
perfect	 proof	often accounts for  police  presentation  of
fool-proof concoction.	Why fake up ? Because the court asks
for  manufacture  to make truth look true ? No, we  must  be
realistic.
We  are satisfied that the broad features of the  case,	 the
general	 trend of the testimony and the convincing array  of
facts	which  are  indisputable,  converge  to	  the	only
conclusion  that may be reasonably drawn, namely,  that	 the
accused are guilty.  Theoretical possibilities may not shake
up,  fancied  weaknesses may not defeat, when  verdicts	 are
rested	on  sure foundations.  Stray  chances  of  innocence
haunting the corridors of the court cannot topple concurrent
findings of guilt.
We  feel  unhappy that, while infirmity in  some  aspect  or
other  of  this prosecution case should not  invalidate	 the
culpability which is otherwise, veraciously made out, tragic
occurrences like this one. should and
39 5
could	be  avoided  by	 preemptive  State   action,   given
imagination  and  intelligence.	  Had  that  been  done	 the
letlial episode might not have materialised and a young life
not been lost.	And, on the other side, two boys, if we	 may
say so, are the convicts, one who is 16 years and the  other
barely	20  years;  and	 yet the attack	 was  induced  by  a
previous murder, rending a family into two feuding  branches
and leading- to this vengeful murder.  And the pity of it is
this  bleeding	explosion  was	sparked	 off  by  a  trivial
friction  caused by turns of irrigation.  We refer  ,to	 the
observation of the High Court :
"As  is	 well known and home out by the reported  cases	 the
drawing of water by turns is an endless cause of dispute,."
If this socioeconomic source of irritation induced by  turns
of  irrigation,	 were  so frequent,  it	 behaved  any  aware
Government  not to watch and wait for murders to take  place
and  then  to prosecute after lives have 'been lost  but  to
anticipate and smoothen the whole process so that  avoidable
frictions and tensions do not hot up.  Violence often erupts
from stress and distress.  If wars are made in the minds  of
man  crimes are rooted in the consciousness of man.   It  is
the vigilant duty of a responsible Government not to  merely
track  down  criminals	after the  crime  but  to  forestall
escalation of traumatic build-ups by quia time steps  before
the  crime.  The Administration, we hope, will not wait	 for
drunken,_brawls	 and deaths in festivals, fights over  turns
of water and deaths in fields and other Eke collisions, but,
like  good  Governments should do, produce  detente  in	 the
villages  by  appropriate measures which  deepen  the  finer
awareness  and foster the better fellowship of men.   It  is
obvious that this duty has gone by default and may  continue
to be so, unless the stiology of crime, in a broader  social
perspective,  were traced and holistic measures	 adopted  in
advance.   Criminology is more than police billy and  'peace
and  order' is more than smart F.I.R. It is positive  action
for prevention, detection and prompt prosecution.
Once we agree, as we do, that the conviction under s. 302 is
right.	the sentence imposed, namely, life  imprisonment  is
the  minimum.	Even  so,  there is  an	 amount	 of  psychic
distress   in	marching  two  young   men   into   lifelong
incarceration.	 The  humanistic  aspect  of  the  case	 may
highlight  the	deplorable  plight of  the  man	 behind	 the
murderer  and  the mind behind bars.  The fact that  he	 has
committed  a murder in a fit of anger or prodded  by  family
feud cannot warrant his being further criminalised by a long
term  of brutalising prison life.  These two young men	must
be redeemed for society because they are after all, men.  In
this  land elevated by the noble example of Valmiki and	 the
humane	faith of Ghandiji, anyone with any background has  a
hopeful future given a therapeutic prison process.
The spiritual basis of our constitutional order-and that  is
the  dharma  of	 danda neeti-is human  dignity	and  'social
justice'  and not the, sedastic cruelty of hard	 confinement
for,  years  on	 end.  The rationale of	 court	sentence  is
social defence coupled With personal correction.
The California Supreme Court implied rehabilitation when  it
said:
"There is no place in the scheme for punishment for its	 own
sake, for the product simply of vengeance or retribution."
396
Indiana, 406 U.S. 715 (1972).
Most   correctional   codes  acknowledge   the	 intent	  to
rehabilitate making it the purpose of confinement.  In	that
context,  Justice  Blackman's language is  meaningful  in  a
United States Supreme Court decision :
	      "At  the least due process requires  that	 the
	      nature  and duration of commitment  bear	some
	      reasonable  relation to the purpose for  which
	      the individual is committed." Jackson v. In re
	      Estrada; 63 Cal. 2nd 740 (1965).
In  1971  a  U.S. District Court  in  Maryland	found  total
rehabilitative	effort	was missing in a prison	 system	 and
ordered	  that	 treatment   be	  accelerated.	   Budgetary
limitations  imposed by the State were no  excuse.   Neither
was   noncooperative  prisoners.   After  all,	 they	need
rehabilitation the most. (McCray v. State, 10 Criminal Reptr
2132.)	We  are clear-and, indeed, this Court has  on  prior
occasions  driven  home	 the  sentencing  essence-that	 the
judicial imprimaturs is given to keeping a man in jail,	 not
in  a  cage, the difference being that in  the	former,	 the
healing	 technique  and hospital setting  chasten  the	tiny
world  behind  the tall walls.	Therefore  we  emphasis	 the
spirit	of change towards rehabilitation.  And	"You  cannot
rehabilitate   a  man  through	brutality  and	 disrespect.
Regardless  of	the crime a man may commit, he	still  is  a
human  being  and  has feeling.	 And the  main	reason	most
inmates in prison today disrespect their keepers, is because
they  themselves (the inmates) are disrespected and are	 not
treated	 like  human beings.  Does this	 type  of  treatment
bring about respect and rehabilitation ? No  It only instill
hostility and causes alienation toward the prison  officials
from the inmate or inmates involved.
If you treat a man like an animal, then you must expect	 him
to  act	 Eke one.  For every action, there  is	a  reaction.
This  is only human nature.  And in order for an  inmate  to
act  like  a  human  being, you	 must  treat  him  as  such.
Treating  him like an animal will only get negative  results
from him.  Lewis Moore (71 p. 72)".
This   reasoning  compels  us  to  issue  certain   positive
directions,  responsible as the court is to ensure that	 the
deprivation  of liberty is accompanied by curative  strategy
and human dignity.  Karuma must refine life in sarcer.
So,  instead of bolting these two young men behind the	high
walls  of  a prison and forgetting  about  them,  humanising
influences  must  be  brought to bear upon them	 so  that  a
better	 sense	of  responsibility,  a	kindlier   attitude,
behavioral  maturity  and  values  of a	 good  life  may  be
generated  under  controlled conditions.  In  this  view  we
direct	 the   State   Government   to	 issue	 appropriate
instructions  to  the  jail authorites	to  give  these	 two
prisoners treatment which is not likely to degrade or offend
dignity	 and  decency but uplift and elevate.	Work  has  a
curative,  property  but the kind of work assigned  must  be
satisfying  not	 degrading.  The Medical  Officer  concerned
will  also be consulted on the proper prescription  in	this
behalf.	   Furthermore,	 if  the  behaviour  of	 these	 two
prisoners
397
shows  responsibility  and trustworthiness,  liberal  though
cautious,  Parole  will	 be allowed to them  so	 that  their
family	ties  may be maintained and inner tensions  may	 not
further	 build	up.  After every period of  one	 year,	they
should	be enlarged on parole for two months  interviews  by
family	members	 must be afforded as often  as	ire  sought.
Useful	crafts	must  be taught inside	prison	and  studies
encouraged.   The Sessions Judge whose sentence	 we  uphold,
shall  make  jail  visits to ensure  compliance	 with  these
directions.   Art.  21	of the Constitution  is	 the  juris-
dictional  root	 for  this  legal  liberalism.	 The   State
Government will take proper steps to comply with this curial
command.  With these broad obligations cast on the State and
the superintendent, we dismiss the special leave petition.
S.R.		  Petition dismissed.
9-277SCI/78
398




