

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Jagdish Chander (Dead) By L. Rs vs Brij Mohan & Ors on 6 February, 1978Equivalent citations: 1978 AIR 1318, 1978 SCR  (2) 805
Author: S M Fazalali
Bench: Fazalali, Syed Murtaza
           PETITIONER:
JAGDISH CHANDER (DEAD) BY L. RS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
BRIJ MOHAN & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT06/02/1978

BENCH:
FAZALALI, SYED MURTAZA
BENCH:
FAZALALI, SYED MURTAZA
SHINGAL, P.N.

CITATION:
 1978 AIR 1318		  1978 SCR  (2) 805
 1978 SCC  (2) 361


ACT:
Transfer  of Prosperty Act, (Act 4 of 1882) ss. 6, 1955	 (2)
read with ss. 15 and 17 of the Specific Relief Act--Contract
of agreement to repurchase the lands, assignability--Whether
specific performance can lie.
U.P.  Zamindari	 Abolition and Land Reforms,  Act  1950,  s.
154--Restrictions on the transfer by a Bhumidari--Powers  of
the  Court to exercise its discretion in passing the  decree
for specific performance.



HEADNOTE:
One  Ata-Ilahi	Khan executed a sale deed in favour  of	 the
appellant, Shri Jagdish Chander on 12-7-1968 and the  latter
took  possession of the suit lands.  On the same day  by  an
agreement, Jagdish Chander agreed to reconvey the suit lands
specifically  to Ata-Ilahi Khan or his heirs, if the  amount
of  consideration was repaid to him within a period of	five
years.	On 18-12-1959, Ata-Ilahi Khan transferred his  right
to  repurchase	through	 a sale deed in favour	of  one	 Bir
Narain and others.  Thereafter, Ata-Ilahi again	 transferred
his 'right to repurchase through another sale deed dated 21-
7-1962	in favour of the plaintiffs-respondents.   The	suit
for  specific  performance filed by the respondents  on	 the
basis  of  the sale deed dated 21-7-1962  failed.   But	 the
first  appellate  Court reversed the judgment of  the  trial
Court  and  decreed the suit.  The High Court  affirmed	 the
said appellate judgment.
Dismissing the appeal by special  leave, the Court.
HELD  :	 I. Supreme Court cannot go behind the	findings  of
fact in appeal by special leave under Art. 136. [807 D-E]
In the instant case, the right to repurchase did not vest in
Bir Narain and others as per the sale deed dated  18-12-1958
in their favour but with the plaintiffs. [807 E]
2.  Before s. 154 of the U.P. Zamindari Abolition  and	Land
Reforms Act 1950 can apply, it must be found as a fact	that
the  person  to whom the property is transferred  must	have
held an aggregate of 121/2 acres or 30 acres as the case may
be at the relevant period. [807 G-H]
In  the	 instant  case the plaintiffs  did  not	 have  lands
exceeding  121/2 acres so as to fall within the mischief  of
s. 154 of the Act. [807 H, 808 A-B]
[The  Court  applied "non-liquet" as to whether	 the  Courts
below  should have exercised their discretion to  passing  a
decree for specific performance]



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL  APPELLATE  JURISDICTION : Civil Appeal  No.  1946  of
1970.
Appeal	by Special Leave from the Judgment and	Order  dated
15-5-1969  of the Allahabad High Court in Second Appeal	 No.
2653 of 1967.
S. C. Manchanda and S. T. Aneja for the Appellants.
M. S. Gupta for Respondents Nos.  1 and 2.
I. S. Sawhney for Respondent No. 3.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
13-119 SCI/78
806
FAZAL ALI, J. This is a defendant's appeal by special  leave
and is directed against the judgment dated 15th May, 1969 of
the Allahabad High Court upholding the decree, passed by the
District  Judge	 in  favour Of the  plaintiff  for  specific
performance of a contract of sale :
 The facts of the case lie within a very narrow compass	 and
may be briefly slated thus.
The defendant Jagdish Chander purchased the lands in dispute
for a consideration of Rs. 6000/- by a sale deed dated	12th
July, 1958 including the Bhumidhari land from Ata Ilahi Khan
who was the proprietor of the said lands.  The sale deed  in
favour	 of  the  defendant  Jagdish  Chander  contained   a
stipulation that the vendor would be entitled to  repurchase
the  property  for the consideration mentioned in  the	sale
deed within five years from the date of the execution of the
sale  deed.  On 18th December, 1958 Ata Ilahi Khan sold	 his
right  of repurchase of the land under the sale	 deed  above
mentioned  to  Bir Narain, Mangal Singh and  Mukanda  Singh.
Thereafter,  a few years later on 21st May, 1962  Ata  Ilahi
Khan  again sold his right of repurchase in respect  of	 the
aforesaid  property  to	 Brij Mohan  and  Chandrapal  Singh,
plaintiffs  No.	 1  & 2. It would thus be  seen	 that  while
selling	 the property to the defendant Jagdish	Chander	 Ata
Ilahi  Khan had clearly incorporated an agreement to  resell
the  land within five years on payment of the  consideration
of the sale deed itself.  Armed with the sale deed  executed
by  Ata	 Ilahi	Khan  in  favour  of  the  plaintiffs,	 the
respondents filed the present suit for specific	 performance
of the contract of sale contained in the sale deed  executed
by  Ata	 Ilahi	Khan  in favour	 of  the  defendant  Jagdish
Chander.  The plaintiffs sought to enforce that part of the,
contract  which	 contained  the	 right	of  the	 vendor	  to
repurchase  the	 property from Jagdish Chander	within	five
years.
The  suit- was tried by the Second Additional  Civil  Judge,
Muzaffarnagar  who  dismissed  the  suit  holding  that	 the
plaintiff's  sale  deed was not	 legally  enforceable.	 The
plaintiffs  then  filed	 ail  appeal to	 the  Court  of	 the
District  Judge.  Muzaffarnagar against the judgment of	 the
Additional  Civil Judge.  The District Judge disagreed	with
the   view  taken  by  the  trial  Court  and  decreed	 the
plaintiffs'  suit holding that the agreement relied upon  by
the  plaintiffs was capable of being enforced The  defendant
Jagdish	 Chander unsuccessfully preferred an appeal  to	 the
High  Court  which  was	 dismissed and	the  decree  of	 the
District  Judge was upheld by the High	Court.	 Thereafter,
the plaintiffs came upto this Court and after being  granted
special	 leave the present appeal has been placed before  us
for hearing.
Mr. Manchanda, learned counsel, appearing for the  appellant
submitted  two	points before us.  In the  first  place,  he
urged  that  in view of. a prior sale deed executed  by	 Ata
Ilahi  Khan  in favour of Bir Narain and others	 dated	18th
December, 1958, the vendor had no right to execute a sale of
the right of repurchase on 21st July, 1962 in favour of	 the
plaintiffs, because the vendor had parted with his title  in
favour	of  Bir Narain and if be had sold  anything  to	 the
plaintiffs  it	was merely a bag of wind.  So  far  as	this
point is concerned, the District Judge reversed the  finding
arrived at by the trial Court and came to a finding
807
of  fact  that the sale deed in favour of Bir Narain  was  a
sham  transaction and did not pass any title to the  vendees
Bir Narain and others.	The District Judge further held that
Bir  Narain  himself appeared as a witness in the  suit	 and
clearly	 deposed that he had surrendered his  interest,	 and
had no title at all.  In this connection, the District Judge
observed as follows
	      "When once, it has been found that Bir  Narain
	      and others had no valid transfer made in their
	      favour  because  of  the want of	a  title  to
	      convey in their vandor, it is too much to	 say
	      that  they  would be possessing the  right  to
	      take  back  the  land in	the  consequence  of
	      repurchase............   Further,	 the   three
	      vendees, Bir Narain, Mukanda Singh and  Mangal
	      Singh,  were  the attesting witnesses  of	 the
	      sale  deed  which	 specifically  stated	that
	      whatever rights they possessed under the	sale
	      deed  dated  20th	 December,  1959  had	been
	      relinquished or surrendered.......... then Bir
	      Narain   (P.W.  5)  has  declared	  on   sworn
	      testimony	 that he and the other	vendees	 had
	      acquired any right under the gale deed Ex.A-20
	      it  is  difficult to accept  the	respondent's
	      contention that the right to repurchase vested
	      in  Bir Narain and others.  In that  view	 the
	      finding of the learned Additional	 Civil-Judge
	      is in correct".
This finding of fact has been affirmed by the High Court and
it  is	not possible for us to go behind these	findings  of
fact  in this appeal by special leave.	For  these  reasons,
therefore,  the	 first	contention  raised  by	the  learned
counsel for the appellant must be overruled.
Another	 point of law which has been argued by	counsel	 for
the  appellant was that as Ata Ilahi Khan or the  plaintiffs
were  possessed	 of the Bhumidhari land which  exceeded	 the
limit  of  12-21/2  acres, the sale was	 invalid  under	 the
provisions  of section 154 of the U.P.	Zamindari  Abolition
and  Land Reforms Act, 1950 (hereinafter referred to as	 the
Act).	Section	 154  of  the  Act  as	it  stood  when	 the
transaction was entered ran thus
	      "154.   Restrictions  on	the  transfer  by  a
	      bhumidhar (1) Save as provided in sub-sections
	      (2) and (3). no bhumidhar shall have rights to
	      transfer by sale or gift, any land other	than
	      tea  gardens  to	any  person  other  than  an
	      institution   established	 for  a	  charitable
	      purpose, where such person shall, as a  result
	      of  the sale or gift, become entitled to	land
	      which  together  with land, if  any,  held  by
	      himself  or together with his family, will  in
	      the  aggregate,  exceed 121/2 acres  in  Uttar
	      Pradesh".
It is manifest that before the section can apply it must  be
found  as  a fact that the person to whom  the	property  is
transferred must have held an aggregate of 121 acres of land
in  U.	P. which was increased to 30 acres at  the  relevant
period.	  In  the  instant  case,  the	District  Judge	 has
returned another finding of fact that the defendant was	 not
able to show by producing the khatauni or any other document
that the plaintiffs No. 1 and 2 who were the transferees had
land
808
exceeding 121 acres.  In this connection, the District Judge
found as follows
	      "On the point of fact as well, the plea is not
	      supported by evidence.  The defendant did	 not
	      produce	the  Khatauni  to  prove  that	 the
	      plaintiffs No. 1 and 2 would, in the result of
	      the   sale  deed	become	entitled   to	land
	      exceeding 121/2 acres".
Thus, on the finding of fact recorded by the District  Judge
and  as affirmed by the High Court, it was established	that
the  transferees, namely, the plaintiffs did not have  lands
exceeding 121/2 acres so as to ,fall within the mischief  of
section	 154  of the Act.  In this view of  the	 matter	 the
second	contention raised by counsel for the appellant	also
fails and it is not necessary for us to examine further	 the
consequences  of violation of the provisions of section	 154
of  the	 Act.  Mr. Manchanda submitted that in view  of	 the
statutory  prohibition contained in section 154 of the	Act,
the  court would not exercise its discretion  for  enforcing
the contract which is prohibited by law.  In view,  however,
of  the	 finding of fact referred to above  that  the  total
bhumidhari  land possessed by the plaintiffs did not  exceed
121/2  acres, or 30 acres, as the case may be, the  question
of  application	 of section 154 of the Act does	 not  arise,
and, therefore, it is not necessary for us at all to go into
the  question  as  whether  or not  the	 court	should	have
exercised  its discretion in passing a decree  for  specific
performance.
The  result is that the contentions raised by Mr.  Manchanda
fail and the appeal is dismissed,, but in the  circumstances
without any order as to costs.
S.R.
			   Appeal dismissed.
809
