

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Chandrasekhar Singh & Ors vs Siya Ram Singh & Ors on 26 September, 1978Equivalent citations: 1979 AIR, 1		  1979 SCR  (1) 947
Author: P Kailasam
Bench: Kailasam, P.S.
           PETITIONER:
CHANDRASEKHAR SINGH & ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
SIYA RAM SINGH & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT26/09/1978

BENCH:
KAILASAM, P.S.
BENCH:
KAILASAM, P.S.
SINGH, JASWANT
KOSHAL, A.D.

CITATION:
 1979 AIR    1		  1979 SCR  (1) 947
 1979 SCC  (3) 118


ACT:
     Code  of	Criminal  Procedure,   1898-Section  146-The
finding	 of  the  Civil	 Court	under  this  Section  as  to
possession is final.
     Code of  Criminal Procedure,  1898, Sections 435 & 439-
Revisional  powers  of	the  High  Court-High  Court  cannot
interfere with	the findings of fact of the Civil Court in a
proceeding under s. 146 Criminal P.C.-Constitution of India,
1950 Art.  227-Power of superintendence of the High Court is
limited.



HEADNOTE:
     In	 the   145  proceedings	  converted  from   the	 144
proceedings on	a police  report dated	29-2-1968, both	 the
appellants-second parties  and the respondents first parties
claimed title  as well	as possession  of the  disputed land
with  them  and	 filed	in  support  documents	and  several
affidavits. The	 magistrate referred  he matte	to the Civil
Court for  a finding  on the issue. On a consideration of he
materials placed  before him,  the munsif  by an order dated
22-12-1975 found  that the appellants-second parties were in
possession. The magistrate passed an order dated 7-4-1976 in
accordance with	 the findings  on the issue as to possession
by the	munsif holding	that the  appellants-second  parties
were  in  possession.  The  High  Court	 in  revision  under
sections 435  and 439  of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1898,
was of	the view  that the  finding as	to possession on the
basis of  documents alone  without applying  the mind to the
affidavits cannot  be sustained	 and set  aside	 the  orders
passed by the magistrate.
     Allowing the appeal by special leave, the Court.
^
     HELD :  (1) The  finding of the Civil Court given under
s. 146(1B)  of the  1898 Code  regarding possession is final
and cannot  be	challenged  by	way  of	 appeal,  review  or
revision, though  the Civil  Court acting  under section 146
(IA) and  (IB) of the Criminal Procedure Code has not ceased
to be  a Civil	Court. Neither an appeal nor a revision lies
against the  finding of	 the Civil  Court in  the  reference
because of  the express provision in section 146(1D) and not
because the proceeding before the Civil Court is not a civil
proceeding [951C-D, E]
     State of  U.P. v. Ramachandra Aggarwal [1966] Supp. SCR
393 followed.
     (2) An  order passed  by the  magistrate in  conformity
with the  decision of  the Civil  Court cannot be challenged
under sections	435 and	 439 of	 the code.  Sub-section (1B)
requires the  magistrate on  receipt of	 the findings by the
Civil Court  to proceed and dispose of the proceedings under
s. 145	in conformity  with the decision of the Civil Court.
If the	order of  the magistrate  is in	 conformity with the
decision  of   the  Civil  Court,  the	magistrate  will  be
complying with	the requirements of section 146 (1B) and the
order thus passed cannot be challenged. It will of course be
open to	 the High  Court to  interfere if  the order  of the
magistrate is  not in  conformity with	the finding  of	 the
Civil  Court.  When  the  order	 of  the  magistrate  is  in
conformity with	 the finding  of the  Civil Court,  the High
Court has  no jurisdiction  to interfere  under sections 435
and 439 of
948
the Criminal  Procedure	 Code.	When  there  is	 an  express
provision namely,  sub-section (1D)  in the Code against the
challenge  of	the  finding   of  the	Civil  Court,  other
provisions of  the Criminal  Procedure Code cannot be relied
on for doing what is expressly prohibited. [952A-D]
     (3) The  powers conferred	on the High Court under Art.
227 of	the Constitution  cannot in  any way be curtailed by
the provisions of the Criminal Procedure Code. Therefore the
powers of  the High Court under Art. 227 of the Constitution
can be	invoked in spite of the restrictions placed under s.
146 (TD) of the Criminal Procedure Code. [952D-E]
     But the  scope of	interference by the High Court under
Art. 227 is restricted to seeing that the tribunal functions
within its limits of authority. The power of superintendence
cannot be  invoked to correct the error of fact which only a
superior Court	can do in exercise of its statutory power as
the Court  of appeal  and that	the  High  Court  cannot  in
exercise of  its jurisdiction  under Art. 227 convert itself
into a Court of appeal. [952F, G, 953A]
     Waryam Singh  v. Amar Nath [1954] SCR 56; Nagendra Nath
Bora &	Anr. v. Commissioner of Hills Division, and Appeals,
Assam &	 Ors., [1958]  SCR 1240; Babhutmal Raichand Oswal v.
Laxmibai R. Tarts, AIR 1975 SC 1297 reiterated.
     Raja Singh	 v. Mahendra  Singh,  AIR  1963	 Patna	243;
Dewani Choudhary  & Ors.  v.  Chaturi  Manjhi  &  Ors.	1971
B.L.J.R. 116;  Farzand Ali  v. Shaukat	Ali & Ors., AIR 1971
All. 12; discussed.
     In the  instant case,  the Civil  Court has  taken into
account the  affidavits filed  on behalf  of the parties and
rejected them  on finding  that no  weight could be given to
the  affidavits	 having	 been  sworn  by  persons  who	were
interested and belonged to one party or the other. [953D-E]
OBSERVATION :
     [In view  of the coming into force of the Cr. P.C. 1973
     (Act II  of 1974)	and the amendment of Art. 227 of the
     Constitution by  the 42nd	Amendment, the	question  as
     dealt with in the Judgment will not any longer arise.]



JUDGMENT:
     CRIMINAL APPELLATE	 JURISDICTION :	 Criminal Appeal No.
148 of 1977.
     Appeal by	Special Leave  from the	 Judgment and  Order
dated 10-1-77  of the  Patna High Court in Criminal Revision
No. 765 of 1976.
     R. K.  Jain, R.  L. Singh, R. P. Singh and Rajeev Datta
for the Appellants.
     Lal Narayan Sinha and M. P. Jha for the Respondent.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     KAILASAM, J.  This appeal	is by  special leave  by the
second party  in Section  145 of the Criminal Procedure Code
proceedings against  the judgment of the Patna High Court in
Criminal Revision No. 765 of 1976.
949
     On	 receipt   of  a   Police  Report  dated  29-2-1968,
proceedings under Section 144 of the Criminal Procedure Code
were started  on 18-3-1968. The appellants in this Court are
the Second  Party and  the respondents	the First Party. The
proceedings were  converted  into  one	under  Section	145,
Criminal Procedure  Code  and  the  lands  in  dispute	were
attached on  14-5-1968. Both  the parties  claimed title  as
well as possession of the disputed land with them. The First
Party,	respondents,   filed  their   documents	  and	nine
affidavits in  support of their claims while the appellants,
Second Party,  filed several  documents and 12 affidavits in
support of  their case. The Magistrate on a consideration of
the material  placed before  him  found	 himself  unable  to
decide as  to which of the parties had been in possession of
the disputed  land, and	 referred the  matter to  the  civil
court for  a finding on the issue. On a consideration of the
materials placed before him the Munsif by an order dated 22-
12-1975 found  that the	 appellants, Second  Party, were  in
possession and	sent back  the records to the Magistrate for
disposal according  to law.  The Magistrate  passed an order
dated 7-4-1976	in accordance  with the finding on the issue
as to possession by the Munsif, holding that the appellants,
Second Party were in possession.
     Aggrieved by  the order  of the  Magistrate, the  First
Party filed  a Revision Petition to the High Court. The High
Court found  that the  Munsif had  failed  to  consider	 the
affidavit of  either  party  but  decided  the	question  of
possession only	 on the	 documents. As	the Munsif failed to
consider the affidavits, the High Court was of the view that
the finding as to possession on the basis of documents alone
without applying  its mind  to	the  affidavits,  cannot  be
sustained. The	appellants, Second Party, being aggrieved by
the order has come up to this Court by special leave.
     The questions  that arise	for  consideration  in	this
appeal are  (1) whether	 the finding  of Civil	Court  under
section 146 (1B) can be challenged by way of an appeal or by
review or  revision, (2) whether an order which is passed by
the Magistrate	on the	receipt of  the finding of the Civil
Court, in  conformity with  the decision of the Civil Court,
can be	challenged before  the High Court under Sections 435
and 439	 of the	 Criminal Procedure Code, and (3) whether an
order passed by the Magistrate under Section 146 (1B) can be
interfered with	 by the High Court in exercise of its powers
under Article 227 of the Constitution of India.
     There is  conflict of views between various High Courts
regarding the  points raised.  We would content ourselves by
referring  to	three  full   bench  decisions	wherein	 the
decisions of  all the  High Courts  are referred to. The two
full Bench decisions of the Patna High Court
950
are reported  in  A.I.R.  1963	Patna  243  (Raja  Singh  v.
Mahendra Singh), Dewani Choudhary and Ors. v. Chaturi Manjhi
and Ors.  (1971 B.L.J.R. p. 116). The full Bench decision of
the  Allahabad	 High  Court  is  reported  in	A.I.R.	1971
Allahabad p. 12 (Farzand Ali v. Shaukat Ali & Ors.
 In Raja Singh v. Mahendra Singh (supra), the Full Bench
of the Patna High Court by a majority of 2 to 1 held that in
exercise of its revisional powers under Sections 435 and 439
of the	Code of	 Criminal Procedure,  the High Court can, in
suitable cases,	 interfere with	 the decision  of the  Civil
Court given  by it  under sub-Section (1-A) upon a reference
made to	 it under sub-Section (1) of Section 146 of the Code
after  the   referring	Magistrate   has  disposed   of	 the
proceeding under  Section 145  under sub-Section  (1-B), and
that the  bar as  to appeal,  review and revision imposed by
sub-Section (1-D)  operates only  so long  as the Magistrate
has not	 passed his order under sub-section (1-B) of Section
146. The majority view on the other hand, is that the bar of
sub-Section (1-D)  continues even  after the  Magistrate has
disposed of  the proceeding  under sub-Section (1D). All the
three learned  Judges constituting  the Full  Bench however,
agreed that  nothing in	 sub-Section (1-D) affects the power
of superintendence which the High Court enjoys under Article
227 of	the Constitution.  The correctness  of this decision
was considered	by a full Bench of five Judges in the Dewani
Choudhary's  case   (supra).  The   Full  Bench	 upheld	 the
unanimous view in Raja Singh's case (supra) that sub-Section
(1-D) does  not take away the power of judicial interference
which the  High Court  possesses under	Article 227  of	 the
Constitution with  the decision	 of the	 Civil	Court  given
under sub-Section  (1A)	 of  Section  146  of  the  Criminal
Procedure Code	in cases  involving  flagrant  violation  of
legal principles or principles of natural justice.
     The second	 question that was considered in Choudhary's
case was  whether the  High Court was competent to interfere
with the  findings of  the Civil Court under Section (1A) of
Section 146  in the  exercise  of  its	powers	of  criminal
revision; the  Full Bench  held that  there is	no scope for
interference  with  the	 findings  of  the  Civil  Court  in
exercise of the criminal revisional jurisdiction of the High
Court, not  by reason of the bar enacted in sub-Sec. (1D) of
Section 146.  but upon	the express term of Sections 435 and
439 of	the Code.  The power  of the  High Court is confined
against the  final order which the Magistrate is enjoined to
pass in	 conformity with the decision of the Civil Court. In
doing so,  the High Court can examine whether the Magistrate
passed the  final order	 in conformity	with the decision of
the Civil Court or not. But it cannot embark upon an enquiry
as to the legality or
951
propriety of  the decision  of the  Civil Court which is the
basis of  the Magistrate's final order. On this question the
full Bench  did not accept the majority view in Raja Singh's
case (supra).
     The Allahabad  High Court	(AIR 1971  All. 12 FB-Supra)
considering the	 question whether the bar contemplated under
Section	 146  (1B)  is	a  bar	against	 the  finding  being
interfered with	 in revision  even against  the order of the
Magistrate  who	  decides  the	 proceeding  before  him  in
accordance with	 the finding  of the  Civil Court, held that
even in	 revision from	the ultimate order which disposes of
the proceedings in accordance with the findings of the Civil
Court, the  finding of	the Civil Court cannot be interfered
with.
     An examination  of the  provisions of  Section  146  of
Criminal Procedure  Code of 1898 would show that the finding
of  the	 Civil	Court  on  a  reference	 by  the  Magistrate
regarding  possession	cannot	be   appealed	against	  or
challenged by  way of  review or  revision. Though the Civil
Court acting  under Section  146 (1A)  and (1B)	 of Criminal
Procedure Code,	 has not  ceased to  be a  Civil Court,	 the
finding regarding possession given by the Civil Court cannot
be challenged  by an  appeal, revision	or review.  In other
words, the  finding given  by the Civil Court is final. This
Court in  State of  U.P. &  Anr. v.  Ramchandra Aggarwal and
Anr.(1) held  that neither  an appeal  nor a  revision	lies
against the  finding of	 the Civil  Court in  the  reference
because of the express provision in Section 146 (1D) and not
because the proceeding before the Civil Court is not a civil
proceeding. The	 wording of Section 146 (1D) puts the matter
beyond any controversy. Sub-Section (1D) reads as follows:-
     "No appeal	 shall lie  from any  finding of  the  Civil
     Court given on a reference under this Section nor shall
     any review or revision of any such finding be allowed".
The sub-Section makes it clear that the finding of the Civil
Court cannot  be questioned  by way  of an  appeal. It	also
prohibits any  challenge to  the finding by way of review or
revision. The answer therefore to the first question is that
the finding  of the civil court given under Section 146 (1B)
regarding possession  is final	and cannot  be challenged by
way of appeal, review or revision.
     The second	 question that	arises is  whether when	 the
Magistrate passes an order on receipt of a finding, from the
civil court  that order can be challenged by way of revision
before the High Court. The plea that was put forward was the
bar to	the challenge  of the  finding of the civil court is
lifted when the Magistrate passes his order after
952
the receipt  of the  finding of the civil court. Sub-section
(1B) requires  the Magistrate  on receipt of the findings by
the civil  court to  proceed and  dispose of the proceedings
under Section  145 in  conformity with	the decision  of the
civil court. If the order of the Magistrate is in conformity
with the decision of the civil court, the Magistrate will be
complying with	the requirements of Section 146 (1B) and the
order thus passed cannot be challenged. It will of course be
open to	 the High  Court to  interfere if  the order  of the
Magistrate is  not in  conformity with	the finding  of	 the
civil  court.  When  the  order	 of  the  Magistrate  is  in
conformity with	 the finding  of the  civil court,  the High
Court has  no jurisdiction  to interfere  under Sections 435
and 439	 of the	 Criminal Procedure  Code. When	 there is an
express provision  sub-Section (1D)  in the Code against the
challenge of the finding of the civil court other provisions
of the Criminal Procedure Code cannot be relied on for doing
what is	 expressly prohibited.	The answer  therefore to the
second question	 is that  an order  passed by the Magistrate
under Section  146 (1B)	 in conformity	with the decision of
the civil  court cannot be challenged under Sections 435 and
439.
     The only  other question  that remains to be considered
is whether an order under Section 146 (1B) can be interfered
with by	 the High  Court in the exercise of its powers under
Article 227  of the  Constitution. It  is admitted  that the
powers conferred  on the  High Court  under Art.  227 of the
Constitution  cannot   in  any	 way  be  curtailed  by	 the
provisions of  the Criminal  Procedure Code.  Therefore, the
powers of  the High Court under Art. 227 of the Constitution
can be	invoked in  spite of  the restrictions	placed under
Section 146(1D)	 of the	 Criminal Procedure  Code.  But	 the
scope of  interference by  the High  Court under Art. 227 is
restricted. This  Court has  repeatedly held that "the power
of  superintendence  conferred	by  Article  227  is  to  be
exercised most	sparingly and  only in	appropriate cases in
order to  keep the  subordinate courts	within the bounds of
their authority and not for correcting mere errors vide 1954
S.C.R. 565 (Waryam Singh v. Amar Nath). In a later decision,
(Nagendra Nath Bora and another v. The Commissioner of Hills
Division, and  Appeals, Assam  and Others(1),  the view	 was
reiterated and	it was	held  that  the	 power	of  judicial
interference under  Article 227	 of the Constitution are not
greater	 than	the  power   under  Article   226   of	 the
Constitution, and  that under  Art. 227 of the Constitution,
the power  of interference  is limited	to seeing  that	 the
tribunal functions  within the limits of its authority. In a
recent decision,  (Babhutmal Raichand  Oswal v.	 Laxmibai R.
Tarts(2) this Court reiterated the view stated in the
953
earlier decisions  referred to	and held  that the  power of
superintendence under Article 227 of the Constitution cannot
be invoked to correct an error of fact which only a superior
court can do in exercise of its statutory power as the Court
of appeal  and that the High Court cannot in exercise of its
jurisdiction under  Art. 227  convert itself into a court of
appeal.
     The High  Court has  interfered with  the order  of the
Magistrate which  is in	 conformity with  the finding of the
civil court  regarding possession  on the  ground  that	 the
civil court  has failed	 to consider the affidavits filed by
the parties. The High Court on a reading of a passage in the
judgment of  the civil court came to the conclusion that the
Munsif failed  to consider  the affidavits.  In dealing with
the affidavits, the civil court observed that as persons who
had sworn  to the affidavits, are highly interested persons,
undue importance  cannot be  attached upon their oath. After
referring to  the person on both sides, who had sworn to the
affidavits, the civil court stated that "I do not think that
these affidavits  and counter-affidavits will be of any help
to either  party". We  find that  the civil  court has taken
into account  the affidavits  filed on behalf of the parties
but as	the persons  who had  sworn to	the affidavits	were
interested and	belonged to one party or the other, it found
that no	 weight can  be given  to the  affidavits. We do not
agree  that  the  rejection  of	 the  affidavits  under	 the
circumstances can  be termed  as  failure  to  consider	 the
affidavits. Apart  from finding that the reason given by the
High Court  is not  convincing, we  are of  opinion that the
High Court  has no  power under	 Sections 435 and 439 of the
Criminal Procedure  Code to  interfere with  the findings of
the civil  court regarding  possession in  a reference under
Section 146 of the Criminal Procedure Code. In the result we
hold that  the High  Court was in error in invoking Sections
435 and	 439 for  interfering with  the finding of the civil
court. In  fact,  Mr.  Lal  Narain  Sinha,  learned  counsel
appearing  for	the  respondent,  with	his  usual  fairness
conceded that  he cannot  contend that the High Court can in
exercise of  its power	under Sections 435 and 439 interfere
with the finding of the civil court regarding possession.
     But Mr.  Lal Narain  Sinha submitted  that the order of
the High  Court could  be sustained as the power of the High
Court under Art. 227 cannot be questioned. While there could
be no  dispute that  the power	of the High Court under Art.
227 cannot  be curtailed  under Section	 146 of the Criminal
Procedure Code,	 we do	not think that the facts of the case
would justify the High Court to interfere under Art. 227.
954
     Before concluding	the judgment,  we may point out that
Section 146  of the  Code of  Criminal Procedure 1898, is no
longer in force having been replaced by the Code of Criminal
Procedure of  1973 (Act	 2 of  1974). Under the new Section,
146(1), if the Magistrate is unable to satisfy himself as to
which of  the parties  was in  possession of  the subject of
dispute he  may	 attach	 the  subject  of  dispute  until  a
competent Court	 has determined	 the rights  of the  parties
thereto with regard to the person entitled to the possession
thereof. Art.  227 has	also  been  since  amended  by	42nd
Amendment further  restricting the  powers of the High Court
to interfere under Art. 227. The question thus dealt with by
us can	no longer  arise after	the coming into force of the
Code of	 Criminal Procedure  (Act 2  of 1974). In the result
the appeal is allowed and the order of the High Court is set
aside and that of the Magistrate is restored.
S.R.					     Appeal allowed.
955




