

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Parmanand Dass vs State Of Andhra Pradesh on 15 September, 1978Equivalent citations: 1978 AIR 1745, 1979 SCR  (1) 792
Author: P Kailasam
Bench: Kailasam, P.S.
           PETITIONER:
PARMANAND DASS

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF ANDHRA PRADESH

DATE OF JUDGMENT15/09/1978

BENCH:
KAILASAM, P.S.
BENCH:
KAILASAM, P.S.
SINGH, JASWANT

CITATION:
 1978 AIR 1745		  1979 SCR  (1) 792
 1978 SCC  (4)	32


ACT:
     Sanctioning authority  for the purposes of Section 6 of
the  Prevention	  of  Corruption  Act  under  the  Hyderabad
Municipal Corporation  Act, 1955  as amended  by Act  II  of
1970-Whether subsequent sanction is invalid since an earlier
sanction was held to be invalid.



HEADNOTE:
     The prosecution  of the  appellant, who was charged for
having received	 an illegal gratification was held to be bad
by the Special Judge, since the sanction for the prosecution
under Section  6 of  the Prevention  of Corruption  Act	 was
granted	 by   the  Commissioner	  instead  of  the  Standing
Committee of  the Hyderabad Municipality. He was, therefore,
reinstated in  service and when the Commissioner wrote again
for the sanction, the Standing Committee recorded on 17-6-70
to drop	 the case  on the ground that it was an old case and
the appellant had already been reinstated in service.
     The Hyderabad  Municipal Corporation (Amendment) Act II
of 1970	 came into force on 27-6-70, under which a provision
was made  for  the  appointment	 of  a	special	 officer  to
exercise the powers, to perform the duties and discharge the
functions of  (a) the Corporation (b) the Standing Committee
and (c)	 the Commission under the Act. This provision was to
be in  force for a period of two years with effect from 3-8-
70 with	 a further  provision that  it shall not be extended
beyond 31-10-75.
     After Act	II of  1970 came  into force,  on 29-7-72  a
memorandum was	submitted in  the nature  of a	note to	 the
Standing Committee  to take a fresh decision on the issue of
prosecution of	the appellant  and for	granting sanction to
prosecute the  appellant. On 15-5-73, the Standing Committee
by its resolution authorised the special officer to sign the
sanction order	and to	send it	 to Anti-Corruption  Bureau,
Hyderabad. In  pursuance of the resolution, a sanction order
was passed  on 16-6-73. On 29-11-73 the appellant was placed
under  suspension   and	 on   11-12-75,	 the  special  judge
dismissed the petitioner's objections to the validity of the
sanction. The  appellant filed	the appeal by special leave,
as the High Court dismissed his criminal revision petition.
     Allowing the appeal, the Court
^
     HELD :  1. There can be no legal bar to the sanctioning
authority revising  its opinion before the sanction order is
placed before  the Court.  The validity	 of the sanction can
only be	 considered at	the time when it is filed before the
Special Judge. Subsequent sanction having been given, in the
present case,  by the competent authority, the plea that the
Standing Committee again considered the question but decided
to drop	 the proceedings  on the  ground that  it was an old
case and  the  appellant  had  already	been  reinstated  in
service cannot be accepted. [794D-F]
793
     2. The  validity of  the sanction	cannot be upheld, as
the special  officer who  is entitled  under  the  Hyderabad
Municipal Corporation  Act, 1955  as amended  by Act  II  of
1970, has  not given the sanction as a special officer or by
himself exercising the powers of the Standing Committee, but
issued the sanction order in pursuance of the sanction given
by the	Standing Committee  by its resolution dt. 15-5-1973.
[796C-D]



JUDGMENT:
     CRIMINAL APPELLATE	 JURISDICTION :	 Criminal Appeal No.
482 of 1976.
     Appeal by	Special Leave  from the Judgment dated 20-1-
1976 of	 the Andhra  Pradesh High Court in Criminal Revision
Case No. 18 of 1976.
     R. V. Pillai and H. K. Puri for the Appellant.
     P. Parmeshwara Rao and G. N. Rao for the Respondent.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     KAILASAM, J.  This appeal	is by  special leave against
the judgment  of Andhra	 Pradesh  High	Court,	in  Criminal
Revision No.  18 of  1976 holding  that the  sanction  order
given for  prosecuting the appellant is valid and dismissing
his Revision Petition.
     The appellant  Parmanand Dass, was appointed as a clerk
in Hyderabad Municipal Corporation on 15-1-1951 in the scale
of Rs.	40-50 and was promoted to the scale of Rs. 50-105 on
1-9-1956.  A   charge  of   having   received	an   illegal
gratification of Rs. 15/- was brought against him and he was
suspended on  22-9-1966. On  27-5-1967, the  Commissioner of
the Municipal  Corporation  gave  sanction  for	 prosecution
under section  6 of  the Prevention  of Corruption  Act. The
appellant questioned  the validity  of the  sanction on	 the
ground that the Commissioner was not the competent authority
to grant  the  sanction.  The  Special	Judge  accepted	 the
contention and	found that  the Standing  Committee  of	 the
Municipality alone can give sanction and as the Commissioner
had no	powers, the sanction was not valid. Soon after on 4-
5-1970, the  appellant prayed  for his reinstatement, and on
12-6-1970, the	appellant was  reinstated. The Commissioning
on 17-6-1970  again wrote  to the Standing Committee seeking
for a  fresh sanction.	On 27-6-1970, the Standing Committee
resolved to  drop the  case on the ground that it was an old
case and  that the  appellant had already been reinstated in
service.
     On 27-6-1970,  Act II  of 1970 came into force. The Act
provided that  the special  officer appointed  under the Act
will exercise  the powers  of the  Standing Committee of the
Municipal Corporation.	After the Act came into force on 29-
7-1972 a memorandum in the nature of a
794
note to	 the Standing  Committee was prepared requesting the
Standing Committee  to take  fresh decision  on the issue of
prosecution of	the appellant,	and for granting sanction to
prosecute  the	 appellant.  On	  15-5-1973,  the   Standing
Committee by  its resolution  authorised the Special Officer
to sign	 the sanction  order and  to send  it to  the  Anti-
corruption  Bureau,   Hyderabad.   In	pursuance   of	 the
resolution, a sanction order was passed on 16-6-1973. On 29-
11-1973, the  appellant was  placed under suspension. On 11-
12-1975,  the	Special	 Judge	dismissed  the	petitioner's
objection to  the validity  of the  sanction. The  appellant
filed Criminal Revision No. 18 of 1976 before the High Court
against the  order of  Special	Judge  and  the	 High  Court
dismissed the  Revision	 Petition  on  20-1-1976,  and	this
appeal by special leave is against that order.
     It was  submitted that  having once  declined to  grant
sanction,  a  subsequent  Standing  Committee  cannot  grant
sanction on  the same facts. It was contended that the grant
of sanction by the Special Officer was not bona fide and was
due to	ulterior motive.  We do	 not see any merit in any of
these submissions.  Sanction given  by the  Commissioner was
rightly rejected by the Special Judge on the ground that the
Commissioner was  not competent	 to grant the sanction. This
could not  prevent a  subsequent sanction being given by the
Competent Authority, but the plea of the learned counsel was
that the  Standing Committee  again considered	the question
but decided  to drop  the proceedings  on the ground that it
was an	old case and the accused had already been reinstated
in service.  There could  be no	 objection to  the  Standing
Committee again	 reconsidering its decision. The validity of
the sanction  can only	be considered at the time when it is
filed before  the Special Judge. We find that there could be
no legal  bar to  the sanctioning authority revising its own
opinion before	the sanction  order  is	 placed	 before	 the
Court.
     On a  consideration  of  the  record  which  ultimately
resulted in  the order of the sanction, we find however that
the sanction  order cannot  be held to be in accordance with
the  law.  It  was  on	27-6-1970,  the	 Standing  Committee
resolved to  drop further  proceedings. On the same day, Act
II of 1970 came into force. Under section 2 of the Hyderabad
Municipal Corporations	(Amendment) Act,  1970,	 which	came
into  force   on  27th	June  1970,  it	 was  provided	that
notwithstanding	 anything   contained	in   the   Hyderabad
Municipal Corporation Act, 1955, there shall be appointed by
the State  Government, by notification in the Andhra Pradesh
Gazette, a  Special  Officer  to  exercise  the	 powers,  to
perform the duties and discharge the functions of-
	  (a) the Corporation;
795
	  (b) the Standing Committee; and
	  (c) the Commissioner.
This provision	was to be in force for a period of two years
with effect  from 3rd August, 1970, with a provision that it
shall not  be extended	beyond 31st October, 1975. It is not
disputed before	 us that  the Amendment Act was not extended
to cover  the period  in question. After the introduction of
the amending  Act, a  Special Officer  was appointed  by the
State Government  by  notification  in	the  Andhra  Pradesh
Gazette. The  Special Officer was to exercise the powers and
perform the  duties  and  discharge  the  functions  of	 the
Standing Committee.  After the	date of coming into force of
the Amending  Act, the	Special	 Officer  can  himself	give
sanction as  he is  empowered to  discharge the functions of
the Standing  Committee. What happened in this case was that
on 29-7-1972  a note  was  prepared  and  submitted  to	 the
Standing Committee  which is  signed by	 one M. Narsing Rao,
for  Special   Officer.	 The  note  requested  the  Standing
Committee  to  take  a	fresh  decision	 on  the  issue	 for
prosecuting  Shri   Parmanand  Dass  for  accepting  illegal
gratification under  Section 6(1)  (c) of  the Prevention of
Corruption Act	1947. The  Standing Committee  on 15-5-1973,
after stating  that the	 Standing Committee of the Municipal
Corporation  of	  Hyderabad  is	  the  authority  to  remove
Parmanand  Dass	  from	his  office  and  that	after  fully
considering and examining the materials placed before it, it
was of the view that the appellant should be prosecuted in a
court of  law for  the said offence, accorded sanction under
section 6(1) (c) of the Prevention of Corruption Act 1974. A
draft sanction	order was  signed by  the  Special  Officer,
Municipal Corporation  of Hyderabad  with a  note that he is
the officer  authorised by  the Standing  Committee  of	 the
Municipal Corporation  of Hyderabad  to	 sign  the  sanction
order. After  the coming  into force  of Act II of 1970, the
Special Officer	 is entitled to exercise powers, perform the
duties	and   discharge	 the   functions  of   the  Standing
Committee. If  the Special  Officer acting  as the  Standing
Committee had  given the  sanction there  would have been no
flaw in the procedure but in this case what we find is, that
a note is prepared for the Standing Committee by one Narsing
Rao signing  on	 behalf	 of  the  Special  Officer  and	 the
Standing  Committee   purporting  to  act  as  the  Standing
Committee, granting  sanction on  16-6-1973. When  asked  to
explain as to what was the procedure that was adopted by the
Special Officer	 and the Standing Committee, and whether the
Standing Committee  was functioning  apart from	 the Special
Officer, Mr.  Parmeshwar Rao,  learned counsel appearing for
the State  of Andhra  Pradesh, submitted  that	the  Special
Officer is himself the Standing
796
Committee and  that  the  note	was  sent  to  the  Standing
Committee that	was Special  Officer himself and that he, as
the Standing  Committee,  gave	the  sanction.	We  find  it
difficult to  accept this  explanation, for,  the High Court
proceeded on  the basis	 that by  the resolution dated 15-5-
1973, the Standing Committee accorded sanction under section
6(1)(c) of  the Prevention  of Corruption Act and authorised
the Special Officer to sign the order according sanction and
accordingly the Special Officer issued the order dated 16-6-
1973.  It  appears,  before  the  High	Court,	the  parties
proceeded on  the basis that the Standing Committee accorded
sanction on  15-5-1973 and authorised the Special Officer to
sign the  order and  accordingly the  Special Officer issued
the  sanction	order.	The  draft  order  of  the  Standing
Committee which is signed by the Special Officer states that
he is  the officer authorised by the Standing Committee. The
plea of	 the learned counsel for the State that the Standing
Committee and  the Special  Officer are	 one and the same is
difficult to  accept in	 the circumstances.  As the  Special
Officer who  is entitled  under the  Act has  not given	 the
sanction as  a Special	Officer or by himself exercising the
powers of  the Standing	 Committee but	issued the  sanction
order in  pursuance of	the sanction  given by	the Standing
Committee, we  are unable  to uphold  the  validity  of	 the
sanction. On this ground we accept the appeal, set aside the
order of  the High  Court and hold that the sanction granted
by order dated 16-6-1973 is not valid in law.
S.R.					     Appeal allowed.
797




