

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Ghaziabad Engineering Co. (P) Ltd vs Certifying Officer, Kanpur And ... on 13 January, 1978Equivalent citations: 1978 AIR  769, 1978 SCR  (2) 534
Author: V Krishnaiyer
Bench: Krishnaiyer, V.R.
           PETITIONER:
GHAZIABAD ENGINEERING CO. (P) LTD.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
CERTIFYING OFFICER, KANPUR AND ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT13/01/1978

BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
SINGH, JASWANT

CITATION:
 1978 AIR  769		  1978 SCR  (2) 534
 1978 SCC  (1) 480


ACT:
Constitution  of  India, 1950, Art.  136-Questions  of	fact
cannot	be  canvassed for invoking the jurisdiction  of	 the
Supreme Court.
Casual	leave, concept of and whether has nexus	 with  total
number	of  days leave that a worker  is  entitled-Value  of
current	 trend in a particular area  or	 industry-Industrial
Employment  (Standing  Orders)	Act 1946  r/w  S.  79(1)  of
Factories Act, 1948.



HEADNOTE:
As against the claim of twelve days casual leave (on a	paid
basis) made by the workmen of the appellant company and	 for
modification  of  the Standing Orders under  the  Industrial
Employment (Standing orders) Act 1946, and the rules  framed
thereunder,    the   certifying	  officer,    taking	into
consideration (a) the financial position of the	 appellant's
undertaking  including	it  having paid	 20%  bonus  to	 its
workers	  (b)	the  prevalent	practice   in	neighbouring
industries  in	that industrial belt of giving	paid  casual
leave,	and  (c)  the  current	trend  in  that	  particular
industrial  area,  granted  the	 modification  reducing	 the
number	of days to six, as being fair and  reasonable.	 The
appellate authority confirmed the said modification.
Dismissing the appeal by special leave, the Court
HELD : 1. Supreme Court's jurisdiction under Art. 136 cannot
be exploited for canvassing pure questions of fact. [535 E]
2.   Casual  leave  is not an automatic,  advantage  to	 the
total  number  of  days' leave that a  worker  is  entitled.
Casual leave is not a matter of right and it is only in	 the
event  of sudden emergencies that casual leave	is  allowed.
Unforeseen   circumstances   may   unexpectedly	  prop	  up
necessitating  sudden  absence	of an  employee,  be  he  in
Government  service or any other office or in an  industrial
undertaking.	The  whole  concept  of	 casual	  leave	  is
calculated to provide for such contingencies. [535 G-H;	 536
A]
3.   A certain number of days' leave prescribed in S.  79(1)
is  the	 minimum and not the maximum.  Current	trend  in  a
particular  area or industry has not the force of  law.	  It
may  have persuasive value but not more, in considering	 the
claim for casual leave.
In the instant case; (1) There is nothing grossly unfair  or
shockingly  violative  of  fairness  or	 justice  warranting
interference  by  this	Court by  exercise  of	its  special
jurisdiction.  After all the excess is around three days  in
a year over the current trend of granting an overall maximum
of  thirty days, which circumstance the Tribunal  has  taken
note of. [535 F, 536 C-D]
Alembic Chemical Works Co. Ltd. v. Workmen [1963] 1 SCR	 297
reiterated.



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL  APPELLATE  JURISDICTION	:  Civil  Appeal  No.	2171
of
1970.
Appeal	by Special Leave from the Order dated  30-3-1970  of
the  Appellate Authority Allahabad (Industrial Tribunal)  in
Standing.  Order Appeal No. 8/69.
K.   P. Gupta for the Appellant.
5 3 5
G. N. Dikshit and O. P. Rana for Respondent No. 1.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
KRISHNA IYER, J.-This appeal by special leave raises a short
question which has been decided adverse to the appellant  by
the  certifying officer, Kanpur and the Industrial  Tribunal
which  is  the appellate authority.  The narrow	 point	that
falls for decision is as to whether the modification of	 the
Standing  Orders under the Industrial  Employment  (Standing
Orders)	 Act,  1946  and the  rules  framed  thereunder	 was
illegally    made   by	 the   certifying   officer.	 The
modification,itself  related  to grant of six  days'  casual
leave  (on a paid basis) to the workers in  the	 appellant's
factory in Ghaziabad.  The certifying officer has considered
this  grant  of casual leave as fair and  reasonable  having
regard	to  the	 prevalent  practice  in  the	neighbouring
industries of this industrial belt and also paying attention
to  the financial position of the  appellant's	undertaking.
For this purpose he has relied upon the fact that 20%  bonus
was  paid  under  the Payment of Bonus	Act,  1965  and	 has
'further  stated  that	certain other  factories  have	been
giving	paid  casual leave for their workers.	These  facts
persuaded  him to grant the modification  although  reducing
the  number  of	 days to six as	 against  twelve  which	 the
workers. originally claimed.
The  appellate authority concurred by a separate  discussion
in the same, conclusion.  We are requested by Shri Gupta  to
reverse	 this concurrent refinding of fact on  two  grounds.
He states that the undertaking of the appellant is a  losing
proposition and relies upon certain balance sheets stated to
have  been produced before the certifying officer.  He	also
argues	that there is no positive material to make out	that
other  industries in the locality are graning  casual  leave
for their workers.
These	are  pure  questions  of  fact	and   this   Court's
jurisdiction   under  Art.  136	 cannot	 be  exploited	 for
canvassing  points  such  as these.  It is  clear  that	 the
modification  was within the jurisdiction of the  certifying
officer and he has not contravened any provision of the	 Act
or  any statute.  The Factories Act, 1948 prescribes  in  S.
79(1)  a  certain  number of days' leave  but  this  is	 the
minimum	 and not the maximum as has been indicated  in	this
Court's	 ruling	 in  Alembic  Chemical	Works  Co.  Ltd.  v.
Workmen(1).  Moreover, the model Standing Orders as well  as
the Schedule to the Industrial Employment (Standing  Orders)
Act,  1946  deal with casual leave.  In this view  there  is
nothing	 illegal in the order impugned nor are we  satisfied
that  there is anything shockingly violative of fairness  or
justice.  It is a notorious fact that casual leave is not an
automatic advantage to the total number of days' leave	that
a  worker  is entitled.	 It is only in the event  of  sudden
emergencies  that  casual leave	 is  allowed  and  so  the
grievance of the appellant is exaggerated, if not imaginary.
Apart	from   this,  it  is  elementary   that	  unforeseen
circumstances may unexpectedly prop up necessitating  sudden
absence	 of an employee, be he in Government service or	 any
other  ,offices or in an industrial undertaking.  The  whole
concept of casual
(1)  [1963] 1 S.C.R. 297.
536
leave is calculated to provide for such contingencies.	 We,
see  nothing unfair in the certifying officer according	 six
days  by way of casual leave to the workers.  After all	 the
contentment  of	 the workers is an  essential  component  of
their  efficiency  and	if the certifying  officer  and	 the
Appellate  Authority  who deal regularly with  such  matters
have  felt that this step was fair and nothing is  shown  to
our satisfaction that there is anything grossly unfair about
this  modification, we should not interfere by	exercise  of
the special jurisdiction of this Court.
The third point put forward by Shri Gupta was that according
to the appellate Tribunal, the current trend is to grant  an
overall	 maximum of thirty days leave while in this case  if
the casual leave is also taken into account it may extend to
33-1/2 days leave.  As pointed out earlier, casual leave  is
not  a	matter of right and a man may not got  casual  leave
unless	circumstances  are sudden or which in  the  ordinary
course cannot be met by taking regular leave.  Secondly,  we
are  not  satisfied that the current trend in  a  particular
area  or  industry  has	 the force  of	law.   It  may	have
persuasive  value  but not more.  That is why  after  taking
note of that circumstance, the Tribunal has still chosen  to
affirm	the claim for six days casual leave.  After all	 the
excess is around three days in a year.
We,   therefore,   dismiss   the   appeal,   but,   in	 the
circumstances, without costs,
S. R.	       Appeal dismissed.
537
