

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Shambhu Nath Palit vs Corporation Of Calcutta And Anr on 24 January, 1978Equivalent citations: 1978 AIR  768, 1978 SCR  (2) 606
Author: V Krishnaiyer
Bench: Krishnaiyer, V.R.
           PETITIONER:
SHAMBHU NATH  PALIT

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
CORPORATION OF CALCUTTA AND ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT24/01/1978

BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
SINGH, JASWANT

CITATION:
 1978 AIR  768		  1978 SCR  (2) 606
 1978 SCC  (1) 620


ACT:
Calcutta Municipal Act, 1951, S. 202--Whether the provisions
of  Thika Tenancy Act a bar to the recovery from the  tenant
by  a  landlord, of the rates levied and  collected  by	 the
Corporation as an owner u/s 202 of the Municipal Act.



HEADNOTE:
The  petitioners challenged the levy and collection  of	 the
municipal tax from them as landlords in respect of the	huts
constructed  and  occupied  by their tenants  on  the  lands
leased	to the latter.	The Calcutta High Court, taking	 the
view  that  S. 202 of the Municipal Act, 1951  provided	 for
collection  by the owner of the land of so much of the	rate
as is attributable to the hut which belongs not to the owner
but  to the tenant, directed, that in regard to each bit  of
land and hut thereon, there will be particularisation of the
assessment separately on the consolidated. valuation.
Dismissing the special leave petition, the Court
HELD  1. S. 202 of the Calcutta Municipal Act, 1951 is	more
or  less a self-contained code with the result that what  is
leviable  under that provision cannot be prejudiced  by	 the
existence of any other provision.
2.The  Thika Tenancy Act does not come in the way of  the
petitioner in recovering what is permissible u/s 202 of	 the
Municipal Act.	Thika Tenancy Act deals with rents while  s.
202 deals with rates.  The special provision must prevail so
far as the rates are concerned.
3.A  special  provision	 dealing with  owners  of  bastis
cannot be challenged as discriminatory and violative of Art.
14 of the Constitution, when their position is protected  by
s. 202 of the Municipal Act.



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL  APPELLATE  JURISDICTION	:  Special  Leave   Petition
(Civil) No. 5097 of 1977.
From  the Judgment and Order dated 24-9-75 of  the  Calcutta
High Court in Appeal No. 154 of 1971.
N. R. Chatterjee and Amlan Ghose for the Petitioner.
The Order of the Court was delivered by
KRISHNA IYER, J.-We have heard counsel Mr. Chatterjee on two
grievances  of	his  clinet.  According	 to  him,  the	land
belongs	 to the petitioner, the huts belong to his  tenants,
but the municipal assessment is based upon valuation of	 the
land and the huts together.  This grieVance is taken care of
in two ways.  The High Court had directed that in regard  to
each  bit  of land and hut thereon, there  win	be  particu-
larisation of the assessment separately on the	consolidated
valuation.   Secondly. there is also provision in s. 202  of
the Calcutta, Municipal
 607
Act,  1951  (hereinafter  referred  to	as  the	 'Act')	 for
collection  by the owner of the land of so such of the	rate
as is attributable to the hut which belongs not to the owner
but  to the tenant, if we may put it loosely that way.	 The
details	 have  been  spelt out in s. 202 of  the  Act.	 'We
consider s. 202 as more or less a self-contained code  with
the result that what is leviable under that provision cannot
be prejudiced by the existence of any other provision.
Counsel's  second  grievence is that the provisions  of	 the
Thika  Tenancy	Act  stand  in the  way	 of  the  petitioner
collecting from his tenant any amount in excess of the	rent
fixed  under the Act.  This grievance also has no  substance
because the Thika Tenancy Act deals with rents while s.	 202
deals with rates.  The special provision must prevail so far
as  the rates are, concerned and the petitioner is not	pre-
vented from collecting sums due under s. 202 in the shape of
rates.	 The Thika Tenancy Act does not come in the  way  of
the  petitioner in recovering what is permissible  under  s.
202 of the Act.
Nor are we able to appreciate counsel's contention that	 Art
14  of the Constitution is violated.  Bastis-horrid  hovels,
which  blot the human-scape of India, still survive  in	 our
socialistic pattern-stand as a separate category although as
an ugly but inescapable social reality.	 It is true that the
most  unfortunate  section of the society in  Calcutta	City
dwell in these bastis except those who, unable to afford the
luxury	even  of these bastis, have to seek shelter  on	 the
pavements.   So far as Art. 14 is concerned, the bastis	 and
the  dwellers of bastis stand in a tearfully separate  class
by themselves and a special provision dealing with owners of
bastis cannot be challenged as discriminatory. If ever there
were  any discrimination it is against the human  condition,
rather	the inhuman condition, of these whom dire  necessity
drives to  occupy these hutments.  So far as the owners	 are
concerned  their position is protected by s. 202  and  there
cannot be any complaint except abstract,theoretical and
imaginary  ones, that there is discrimination against  them.
With these observations, the petition is dismissed.
S.R.				Petition dismissed.
608




