

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Muktinarain Jha And Ors vs State Of Bihar on 23 January, 1978Equivalent citations: 1978 AIR  770, 1978 SCR  (2) 602
Author: V Krishnaiyer
Bench: Krishnaiyer, V.R.
           PETITIONER:
MUKTINARAIN JHA AND ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF BIHAR

DATE OF JUDGMENT23/01/1978

BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
SINGH, JASWANT

CITATION:
 1978 AIR  770		  1978 SCR  (2) 602
 1978 SCC  (1) 497


ACT:
Practice  and Procedure--Communication of orders  passed  in
appeal,	 revision  reference by the High Court	in  Criminal
Cases should be sent without least delay--Criminal Procedure
Code (Act II of 1974), 1973, Ss. 371, 388.



HEADNOTE:
The  Petitioners' special leave petition was  dismissed	 for
want  of surrender certificate as required under Rule  6  of
Order XXI of the Supreme Court Rules, 1966.  But in fact the
petitioners did surrender but the Assistant Sessions  Judge
refused	 to take them into jail custody for want of  receipt
of judgment from the High Court.
Allowing  the petition for restoration of the special  leave
petition, the Court.
Observed :-
It  is unfortunate that when High Courts  deliver  judgments
confirming  the	 conviction and sentence, there	 is  a	long
delay  in  communicating  the fact  of	affirmation  of	 the
sentence  to  the trial courts.	 A sentence  should  not  be
delayed at least after it is confirmed by the High Court but
when  this  happens on account of the  indifference  of	 the
administrative	side  of the High Court	 in  the  mechanical
process	 of  communication to the trial court  it  does	 not
speak well of the management side of our court system.	[602
H, 603 A]
	      [The  Court  expressed  its  hope	 that	more
	      business-like procedures in such matters would
	      be  evolved so that the rule of law would	 not
	      suffer  a	 new  shock  on	 account  of  messy-
	      management of judicial business-rectifiable by
	      a little more promptitude and attention]



JUDGMENT:
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION : Criminal Appeal No. 169 of
1968.
Application for restoration of Special Leave Petition.
Parmod Swarup for the petitioner.
The Order of the Court was delivered by
KRISHNA	 IYER,	J.  The	 special  leave	 petition  had	been
dismissed  on  an  earlier occasion on the  score  that	 the
petitioners had not surrendered to judicial custody which is
more  or less a condition precedent to seeking the leave  of
this  Court  to file an appeal.	  However,  the	 petitioners
point  out,  in	 the present  petition	for  restoration  of
S.L.P.,	 that  although they had offered  their	 person	 and
surrendered before the, Assistant Sessions Judge, Madhipure,
requesting that they be remanded to jail custody, the  court
declined  to take them into custody for want of	 receipt  of
judgment from the High Court.  Prima facie, this appears  to
be  true  in  view  of annexure A which is  a  copy  of	 the
application put into that court. It is unfortunate that when
High Courts deliver judgments confirming the conviction	 and
sentence, there is a long delay in communicating the fact of
affirmation of the sentence to the trial courts.
603
A  sentence  should  not be delayer at	least  after  it  is
confirmed by the High Court but when this happens on account
of  the indifference of the administrative side of the	High
Court  in  the mechanical process of  communication  to	 the
trial  court it speaks badly of the management side  of	 our
court system.  We wish that more business-like procedures in
such  matters were evolved so that the rule of law need	 not
suffer	a  new	shock  on  account  of	messy-management  of
judicial  business rectifiable by a little more	 promptitude
and attention.
These  observations  have  relevance  to  the  present	case
because,  long after the judgment of the High Court and	 the
sentences  offering to surrender, the court's  sentence	 has
not started to operate and the S.L.P. in this Court has	 had
to  be dismissed-things which should not have and could	 not
have  happened if the High Court's administrative  side	 had
been less indifferent.
The petition is allowed and the S.L.P. will be posted  three
weeks later.   Time   to  surrender  ten  days.	   Meanwhile
communication  of  this	 order,	 with  some   administrative
celerity,  will	 be made both to the High Court and  to	 the
trial court. (The practice direction is to be reported).
S.R.				   Petition allowed.
604




