

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Ram Chander Singh Sagar And Anr vs State Of Tamil Nadu And Anr on 23 January, 1978Equivalent citations: 1978 AIR  475, 1978 SCR  (2) 604
Author: V Krishnaiyer
Bench: Krishnaiyer, V.R.
           PETITIONER:
RAM CHANDER SINGH SAGAR AND ANR.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF TAMIL NADU AND ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT23/01/1978

BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
SINGH, JASWANT

CITATION:
 1978 AIR  475		  1978 SCR  (2) 604
 1978 SCC  (2)	35


ACT:
Power of Supreme Court to transfer criminal cases--Scope  of
S.  406	 of Criminal Procedure Code (Act II of	1974),	1973
(1898 Code S. 527) r/w Order XXXVI S. C. Rules 1966.



HEADNOTE:
The  Petitioners moved this Court u/s 406 Crl.	P. C.,	1973
r/w Order XXXVI Supreme Court Rules, 1966, when their matter
was  at	 the  investigation stage itself  for  an  order  of
transfer of the case to some other court.
Dismissing the petition for transfer, the Court
HELD  : The Code of Criminal Procedure clothes	the  Supreme
Court with power u/s 406 to transfer a case for appeal	from
one  High Court or a Court subordinate to one High Court  to
another	 High Court or to a Court subordinate  thereto,	 but
not  with  the	power to transfer  investigations  from	 one
police station to another in the country simply because	 the
first  information  or	a remand report is  forwarded  to  a
Court.	'lo come to this Court directly seeking an order  of
transfer  in  such  a case is  travelling  along  the  wrong
street.	  If justice is denied, there are  other  redresses,
not u/s 406.  [604 F-G 605 A]



JUDGMENT:
ORIGINAL JURISDICTION : Transfer Petition (Criminal) No.  40
of 1977.
Under Section 406 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
D. P. Bhandare and N. S. Das Bahl for the Petitioners.
V.P. Rama, Adv.	 Genl.	Tamil Nadu and A. V. Rangam for the
Respondents.
The Order of the Court was delivered by
KRISHNA IYER, J.-The Code of Criminal Procedure clothes this
Court  with power under s. 406 lo transfer a case or  appeal
from one High Court or a Court subordinate to one High Court
to  another  High Court or to a Court  subordinate  thereto.
But it does not clothe this Court with the power to transfer
investigations	from  one police station to another  in	 the
country	 simply	 because the first information or  a  remand
report	is forwarded to a Court.  The application before  us
stems  from  a	misconception about the scope  of,  S.	406.
There is as yet no case pending before any Court as has been
made  clear in the counter affidavit of the State  of  Tamil
Nadu.	In the light of this counter affidavit, nothing	 can
be done except to dismiss this petition.
If the petitioners are being directed to appeal in a far-off
Court during investigatory stage it is for them to move that
Court  for  appropriate	 orders	 so that  they	may  not  be
tormented  by  long travel or otherwise teased	by  judicial
process.  If justice is denied there are
605
other redresses, not under s. 406, though it is	 unfortunate
that  the petitioners have not chosen to move that court  to
be  absolved  from  appearance	until  necessitated  by	 the
circumstances or the progress of the investigation.  To come
to  this  Court	 directly seeking an order  of	transfer  is
travelling along the wrong street.  We are sure that if	 the
second	petitioner  is ailing, as is represented,  and	this
fact  is  brought  to  the notice of  the  Court  which	 has
directed her appearance, just orders will be passed in	case
there is veracity behind the representation. We need  hardly
say  courts  should use their processes to  the	 purpose  of
advancing justice, not to harass parties. Anyway, so far  as
thepetition for transfer is concerned, to borrow a cliche,
the less said the better and so we dismiss it.
S. R.				      Petition dismissed.
606




