

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Badri Narain Choudhary & Ors vs Nilratan Sarkar on 10 March, 1978Equivalent citations: 1978 AIR  845, 1978 SCR  (3) 467
Author: R S Sarkaria
Bench: Sarkaria, Ranjit Singh
           PETITIONER:
BADRI NARAIN CHOUDHARY & ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
NILRATAN SARKAR

DATE OF JUDGMENT10/03/1978

BENCH:
SARKARIA, RANJIT SINGH
BENCH:
SARKARIA, RANJIT SINGH
KAILASAM, P.S.

CITATION:
 1978 AIR  845		  1978 SCR  (3) 467
 1978 SCC  (3)	30


ACT:
Partition Act, 1893 Ss. 2 and 3, scope of-Interpretation  of
the  pleadings Equity jurisdiction of the  Courts-Powers  of
Court dehors provisions of Act.



HEADNOTE:
In a suit for partition of the suit property, which was very
small  in dimension measuring .013 acres only filed  by	 the
plaintiff's-appellants,	 the  trial Court  by  its  judgment
dated  14-8-1961  decreed  the suit and	 in  doing  so	took
recourse  to the provisions of S. 3 (2) of the	Partition  A
1893 as could not be con. veniently partitioned.  The  trial
judge  fixed  the  valuation of the  suit  premises  at	 Rs.
11,250/-  and  directed.   "that  the  suit  premises  being
incapable  of  partition shall be put to  sale	between	 the
plaintiffs and the defendant, and the same shall be sold  to
that  party  who offers to pay the highest price  above	 the
valuation  of Rs. 11,250/-".  Since the highest bid  in	 the
last  auction  held  by	 the Court in  June  1965,  was	 Rs.
50,000'/-  and by the plaintiffs the defendant was given  an
option	to purchase the property at that price	and  deposit
the  sale  money by July 1965.	On his	failure,  the  Court
accepted  the highest bid of the plaintiffs.  Accepting	 the
defendant-respondent's	appeal,	 the High Court,  held,	 "by
making	the  averments	in paragraphs 8 and  10(c)  of	this
plaint,	 the plaintiffs have clearly made out a case  to  be
dealt with u/s. 2 of the Act", and therefore, equity had  to
be worked out between the parties by allowing the  defendant
who  was residing in the 1st floor and having a shop in	 the
ground	floor to purchase the share of the plaintiffs  under
the provisions of S. 3 (1)  r/w S. 2 of the Act.  Taking Rs.
11,250/-  as the price of the whole property in	 suit  which
was  the valuation fixed by the trial Court. the High  Court
worked	out  the  value of the	plaintiffs'  share as  Rs.
9,000/-,  and  that  of the defendant  as  Rs.	2,250/-	 and
further	 directed that the defendant be allowed to  purchase
the plaintiffs' share in the suit property.
Allowing the appeal by special leave and remitting the	case
to the trial Court, the Court
HELD  :	 1. Under s. 3 r/w S. 2 of the	Partition  Act,	 the
Court can exercise the power u/s 3; y(i) there is a  request
of  any	 of  the  shareholders	interested  individually  or
collectively  to  the extent of one moiety or  upwards,	 for
sale  of  the  property and its	 distribution  and  (ii)  it
reaches	 an  opinion  that by reason of the  nature  of	 the
property  or  the  number of shareholders  or  some  special
circumstances, a division of the property cannot  reasonably
or conveniently be made and that a sale of the property, and
distribution  of the proceeds would be more  beneficial	 for
all the shareholders.  From the word "may" it is clear	that
even  when both the conditions are satisfied, the Court	 has
discretion  to	direct	,or  not to direct  a  sale  of	 the
property  and  distribution of the  proceeds.	The  request
contemplated is a sine qua non for directing a sale  because
such a request necessarily signified his willingness to have
his share converted into money so that the co-shares may, by
means of the procedure provided in S. 3, buy them out.	 The
request	 for sale envisaged by s. 2 must be one	 for  public
sale.	If no such request has been made to 'the Court s.  3
cannot be brought into operation.
In  the	 instant  case, it is  clear  from  pleadings,	that
neither	 in  substance nor in form any	request	 within	 the
purview	 of  s 2 had been made by any of  the  parties	(co-
shares).  That condition precedent for invoking s. 3 (1) was
larking	 The provisions of Ss. 2 and 3 of the Partition	 Act
are  therefore not applicable to the peculiar  circumstances
of the case. [470 F-H, 471 A-B, F-G]
2.In cases, not covered by Sections 2 and 3 of the Partition
Act,  the power ,of the Court to partition property  by	 any
equitable method is not affected by
468
the  said Act.	In a situation where it is found as a  fact,
that  the  suit	 property  is so small	that  it  cannot  be
conveniently and reasonably partitioned by nietes and bounds
without destroying its intrinsic worth, the Court can devies
such  other feasible method for affecting partition  as	 may
appear to it to be just and equitable, in the  circumstances
of  the case.  In the instant case the suit proparty,  being
incapable of division in specie, there is no alternative but
to  resort to the process called Owelty, according to  which
the rights and interests of the parties in the property will
be  separated,	only by allowing one of them to	 retain	 the
whole  of the suit property on payment of such	compensation
to the other as may be a just equivalent of his share.	[471
G-H, 472 A-B)
Ram  Prasada  Rao  v.  Subramanian,  A.I.R.  1958  A.P.	 647
approved.
[The Court observing, that a more equitable method would  be
to take the value of the property as Rs. 50,000/- which	 was
the  highest bid in 1963 and to allow a reasonable  increase
for  the rise in price, since 1963 upto this date,  directed
the  Trial Court to dispose of the case in  conformity	with
its observations after hearing the parties and after  taking
such  further evidence as may be required preferably  within
three months from the date of its order]



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL  APPELLATE  JURISDICTION : Civil,Appeal  No.  2388  of
1968.
(Appeal	 by Special Leave from the Judgment and	 Decree	 dt.
20-3-1967  of the Patna High Court in First Appeal No.	488,
of 1961)
Lal  Narain  Sinha,  F.	 C.  Nariman,  S.  C.  Aggarwala   &
Aruneshwar Gupta For the Appellants
A. B. N. Sinha, S. N. Prasad for the Respondent
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
SARKARIA,  J.-This  appeal  by special	leave,	is  directed
against a judgment, dated March 20, 1967, of the High  Court
of Judicature at Patna.	 It arises from these circumstances:
The  defendant	respondent  purchased  3/16  share  for	 Rs.
2,250/in  the suit premises by a sale deed, dated March	 25,
1957.	Before	this  sale, the respondent  was	 already  in
occupation of the premises as a tenant paying a monthly rent
of Rs. 53/-, inclusive of water-tax, to the then proprietor.
The  plaintiffs-appellants, who, at the material time,	were
members	 of a joint Hindu family governed by Mtakshara	Law,
purchased the remaining 13/16 share in the suit premises for
Rs.  9,000/-  by a sale deed, dated April  27,	1957.	They
already owned and possessed a parcel of land adjacent to the
suit premises and they intended to open a market there after
amalgamating.  the  same  with	their  share  in  the	suit
premises.   They  asked	 the  respondent  to  partition	 and
separate  their	 share.	  The  respondent  did	not   agree.
Therefore,  on August 8, 1959, on the preceding	 facts,	 the
appellants,  instituted	 the  suit  (No.  64  of  1959)	 for
partition of the suit property, in the Court of the Subordi-
nate Judge, First Court, Patna.
In the plaint, it was inter alia alleged that since the suit
property, was of very small dimensions, measuring .013	acre
only,  and  its	 partition  by	metes  and  bounds  was	 not
feasible.  The plaint also contained'
469
a  proposal from the plaintiffs to purchase the	 defendant's
share  in  the suit premises at a price which  may  be	held
reasonable and proper by the Court.
The  defendant resisted the suit.  He pleaded that he was  a
permanent tenant in the suit premises and not a tenant	from
month  to month; that the plaintiffs had purchased only	 the
right  to receive their proportionate share of	the  monthly
rent, to the extent of Rs. 39/-, but they were not  entitled
to  claim partition.  An alternative proposal was made	that
the defendant was willing to buy the share and rights of the
plaintiffs on a valuation that may be fixed by the Court.
The Subordinate Judge by his judgment dated August 14, 1961,
decreed	 the suit and in doing so, held that  the  defendant
was not a permanent tenant but a tenant from month to  month
only, that the dimensions and the area of the suit  premises
being  very small, it could not be conveniently	 partitioned
and therefore, it was necessary to have recourse to  Section
3(2) of the Partition Act, 1893.  He fixed the valuation  of
the  suit  premises at Rs.11,250/- and	director  "that	 the
'suit premises being incapable of partition shall be put  to
sale between the plaintiffs and the defendant, and the	same
shall  be sold to that party who offers to pay	the  highest
price above the valuation made by me".
According,  the	 suit  property	 was  repeatedly   auctioned
between the parties.  The first was herd in September  1963,
the  highest  bid was offered by the plaintiffs.   The	last
auction	 was  held in June 1965, the highest bid  being	 Rs.
50,000/- offered by the plaintiffs.  The defendant was given
the  option  to	 purchase the property	at  that  price	 and
deposit	 the  sale money by July 19,  1965.   The  defendant
failed	to do so.  The Court thereon ordered that "the	next
highest bid of the plaintiffs to the extent of Rs.  50,000/-
is accepted".
Against	 the  decree  of  the  Trial  Court,  the  defendant
preferred  an appeal to the High Court.	 The Division  Bench
who  heard this appeal held that by making the averments  in
paragraphs  8 and 10(c) of the plaint, "the plaintiffs	have
clearly made out a case to be dealt with under Section 2  of
the Act," and therefore, equity had to be worked out between
the parties by allowing the defendant to purchase the  share
of  the	 plaintiffs under the provisions of  Section  3`(1),
read  with Section 2 of the Act.  Taking Rs. 11,250  as	 the
price of the whole property in suit which was the  valuation
fixed by the Trial Court-the High Court worked out the value
of  the plaintiffs' share as Rs. 9,000/-, and that.  of	 the
defendant's  share as Rs. 2,250/- and further directed	that
the  defendant be allowed to purchase the plaintiffs'  share
in  the	  suit property, for Rs. 9,000/-.   Accordingly,  it
accepted  the  defendant's appeal and dismissed	 the  cross-
objections  of the plaintiffs.	Hence,, this appeal  by	 the
plain-
tiffs.
Mr.  Lal Narain Sinha, learned counsel for  the	 appellants,
contends  that the High Court was in error in  holding	that
the  plaintiffsappellant,  had made any request such  as  in
contemplated, by Section
470
2 of the Partition Act, 1893, and therefore, it was necesary
to  have recourse to Section 3 of the Act.  It is  submitted
that Sections 2 and 3 of the Act did not apply to the  case)
which had, in consequence, to be dealt with de-hors the	 Act
in  accordance with equitable principles.  The	High  Court-
proceeds the argument  has allowed to  defendant-respondant
to purchase the share of the plaintiffs in the suit property
for Rs. 9,000/- only; while the current market value of	 his
share  would  be more than 10 or 12 times  of  that  figure,
which was highly unjust and unfair to the appellants.
As  against this, it is urged on behalf of  the	 respondent,
that once it is held that the Act does not apply, the  Court
has  no power to sell the property.  It is pointed out	that
the High Court had given the respondent the first option  to
purchase  the plaintiffs share in the property at the  value
of  Rs. 9,000/- because the equity was entirely on the	side
of  the respondent, that the plaintiffs were  residing	away
from the property, they owned 5 or 6 houses in Patna,  while
the  respondent and his widowed sister were residing in	 the
first  floor  of the suit property and	the  respondent	 was
running a shop in the ground floor.  It is further submitted
that  the value of the plaintiffs' 13/16 share fixed by	 the
High  Court was the piece at which they had purchased,it  in
1957, and the suit for partition was filed in 1959, that  in
these  circumstances the High Court was right in not  taking
into  account  any increase in its value subsequent  to	 its
purchase  in  1957.   It is maintained that  it	 would	work
hardship  on the respondent who was a poor man, to  fix	 the
value  of  the	plaintiffs' share by  auction  beetween	 the
parties.
Before dealing with these rival contentions, it is necessary
to  ascertain  whether the High Court was right	 in  holding
that  the plaint contained a request such as is referred  to
'InSection  2 of the Act, and therefore, the 'Court had	 but
to accept "theprayer made by the defendant to buy the  share
and rights of tilt"plaintiffs exactly in- terms of Section 3
of the Act".
Sections 2 and 3 of the Act are inter-linked.  A perusal  of
Sections  2 and 3 will show that the Court can exercise	 the
power under Section 3. if
	      (i)  there  is  a	 request  of  any  of	such
	      shareholders   interested	  individually	  or
	      collectively,  to the extent of one moiety  or
	      upwards,	for  sale of the  property  and	 its
	      distribution, and
	      (ii) it reaches an opinion that by reason	 of
	      the  nature, of the property or the number  of
	      shareholders or some special circumstances,  a
	      division	of the propert cannot reasonably  or
	      conveniently 'he made, and that a sale of	 the
	      property	and  distribution  of  the  proceeds
	      would   be   more	 beneficial  for   all	 the
	      shareholders.
Even when both these conditions are satisfied, the Court has
a  discretion  to  direct  or not to  direct  sales  of	 the
property and distri-
471
bution	of the proceeds.  This is clear from the word  "may"
used in this Section.
It  will  be seen from the above analysis that	the  request
contemplated  in No. (1) is a sine qua non for	directing  a
sale  because  such  a	request	 necessarily  signifies	 his
willingness to have his share converted into money, so	that
the  co-sharers may, by means of the procedure	provided  in
Section 3, buy them out.  The request for sale envisaged  by
Section 2 must by one for public sale.	If no such request
has been made to the Court, Section 3 cannot be brought into
operation.
Now  let  us  see whether the plaint  contained	 any  prayer
which-as the High Court has held-substantially amounted to a
request for such sale under Section 2. The material part  of
the plaint reads as follows :
	      "8. That the premises in suit is very small in
	      dimension, measuring .013 acre only, and if it
	      is considered by the court that the separation
	      of  the defendants share in the said  premises
	      is not feasible, the plaintiffs beg to offer a
	      price held to be reasonable and proper to	 the
	      defendant for his share in the said premises.
Again,	in  Para  1  O(c)  it  is  prayed  :  "That  in	 the
alternative when division of premises in suit is considered
not  feasible,	sale  of the defendant's  share	 or  of	 the
premises be directed and the same be .sold to the plaintiffs
for reasonable and proper price."
By  no	stretch	 of language, the above	 extracts  from	 the
plaint,	 could	be  construed to  contain  a  request  under
Section	 2 that the suit ,Property be publicly sold and	 its
sale proceeds distributed pro rata 'between the parties.
Nor  could,  by	 any  reckoning,  the  alternative  proposal
contained  in  the  defendant's written	 statement,  to	 the
effect, that he was prepared to buy out the plaintiffs share
at  evaluation that may be fixed by the Court. amount  to  a
request under Section 2.
In  short.  neither  in substance nor in  form	any  request
within the ,purview of Section 2 had been made by any of the
parties	 (co-sharers).	 That  condition  precedent  ;	 for
invoking Section 3(1) was lacking.
Thus considered, it is clear that the provisions of Sections
2  and	3 ,of the Partition Act are not	 applicable  to	 the
peculiar circumstances of the case.  At the same time, there
is  a  concurrent finding of fact 'recorded  by	 the  courts
below that the suit property is so small, that it cannot be
conveniently and reasonably partitioned by metes and bounds,
without destroying its intrinsic worth.	 This finding is un-
assailable.   In our opinion in such a situation  the  Court
can devise such other feasible mode for effecting  partition
as  may	 appear	 to  it to be  just  and  equitable  in	 the
circumstances  of the case.
The  suit property, being incapable of division	 in  specie,
there is no alternative but to resort to the process  called
Owelty, according
472
to  which  the rights and interests of the  parties  in	 the
property will be separated, only by allowing one of them  to
retain	the  whole of the suit property on payment  of	just
compensation  to  the other.  As rightly pointed out  by  K.
Subba  Rao, C. J. (speaking for a Division Bench  of  Andhra
High Court in A.I.R. 1958 Andhra Pradesh 647), in cases	 not
covered by Sections 2 and 3 of the Partition Act, the  power
of  the Court to partition property by any equitable  Method
is not affected by the said Act.
Now  in the present case, the defendant is the	smaller	 co-
sharer and he is using the property as a shop-cum-residence.
Equity requires that he should be given a preferential right
to  retain  the	 whole of the suit property  on	 payment  of
compensation  being the just equivalent of the value of	 the
plaintiffs'  share to them.  The valuation of'	Rs.  9,000/-
fixed  by  the	High Court, was certainly not  a  fair	com-
pensation  for	the plaintiffs' 13/16 share.  This  was	 the
price  at which the plaintiffs had purchased their share  on
April 27, 1957.	 But in 1958, more than one year before this
suit, which was instituted on August, 1959. a plan or scheme
for concertina this locality into a market had been approved
by  the	 authorities.  This must have led' to  an  immediate
spurt  in  the value of the land in the locality.   In	this
connection  it is pertinent to note that when in  1963	this
Property was, in execution of the decree of the trial court,
put  to	 auction,  the highest bid fetched  by	it  was	 Rs.
50,000/-.  It was therefore, highly unfair to the plaintiffs
to  fix	 the value of their share at Rs.  9,000/-,  even  on
March	20,  1967  when	 the  High  Court's  judgement	 was
pronounced.   Although	the value of the property  could  be
fixed by auction between the two parties, we feel that	this
method'	 would	be  unsatisfactory  in	this  case  as	 the
plaintiffs  who	 own  the, major share	and  have  unlimited
resources,    would   outbid   the   defendant.	   In	 the
circumstances, we think that the more equitable method would
be to take the value of the property as Rs. 50,000/- in 1963
and allow a reasonable increase for the rise in price  since
1963 to this date, taking into account the rise in price  in
the  locality  and give the defendant the  first  option  to
retain the whole property on payment of 13/16 share of	that
valuation (including the increase) to the plaintiffs  within
a period of three months or such further period that may  be
granted	 by  the Court of first instance, facing  which	 the
plaintiffs  will  be  entitled to be  allotted	and  put  in
possession of the whole, of the suit property. on payment to
the  defendant 'of 3/16 share of the value of  the  property
determined  by the Subordinate Judge, Patna, in	 the  manner
aforesaid.
For  the foregoing reasons, we allowed this appeal and	send
the  case  back to the Subordinate Judge,  Patna,  with	 the
direction  that the should take such further  evidence	with
regard to the increase in the value of similar properties in
the locality since 1963. as the parties may wish to produce,
and then and after hearing the parties, dispose of the	case
in  conformity with the observations made in this  Judgment.
There shall be no order as to costs in this Court.
S.R.
			       Appeal allowed.
473
