

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
M. R. Dhawan vs Delhi Administration & Raja ... on 13 March, 1978Equivalent citations: 1978 AIR 1011, 1978 SCR  (3) 488
Author: S M Fazalali
Bench: Fazalali, Syed Murtaza
           PETITIONER:
M. R. DHAWAN

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
DELHI ADMINISTRATION & RAJA PRATAP BHANU PRAKASH SINGH

DATE OF JUDGMENT13/03/1978

BENCH:
FAZALALI, SYED MURTAZA
BENCH:
FAZALALI, SYED MURTAZA
SHINGAL, P.N.

CITATION:
 1978 AIR 1011		  1978 SCR  (3) 488
 1978 SCC  (2) 184


ACT:
Constitution  of  India,  1950,	 Art.  136-Interference	  by
Supreme Court in the discretionary powers of High Court.'
Criminal  Procedure  Code (Act 5), 1898- S.  437  Revisional
Powers of the High Court.
Criminal Procedure Code, (Act II of 1974), 1973 Section 484,
Scope of.



HEADNOTE:
A  complaint filed by respondent Pratap Bhanu Prakash  Singh
alleging  that	the appellant to whom he has  entrusted	 the
27000 shares purchased by him from Rohtas Industries against
a  loan	 of  Rs.  1.82 lacs  advances  by  the	latter,	 has
committed  a  breach of trust of the amount covered  by	 the
shares	by selling them against his express directions,	 was
inquired  into the trial magistrate and was dismissed  later
on  28-10-71.  The revision filed before the Sessions  Judge
Delhi  failed.	In the further revision, the High Court	 set
aside the order of discharge and directed that the appellant
be committed to the Court of Sessions.
Dismissing the appeal by special leave, the Court
HELD  :	 1.  it is not for the Supreme Court  in  appeal  by
special leave to go into the sufficiency or insufficiency of
the  material  before  the magistrate  which  may  afford  a
justification for passing an order of discharge.  Under sec-
tion 213, sub-clause	 (2) of the Crl.  Procedure.   Code,
1898, a magistrate can discharge the accused if	  he   finds
that  there  are no sufficient grounds	for  committing	 the
accused.  [490 B-D]
2.  Under section 437 of the Criminal Procedure	 Code  1898,
the revisional Court in hearing a  revision petition against
an order of discharge passed by the magistrate may direct  a
commitment  without  any inquiry at all or he may  direct  a
fresh	  inquiry.   There  are	 two  courses  open  to	 the
revisional Court : (1) either to   set	aside the  order  of
disc  charge  and direct a fresh inquiry to  be	 made  under
Section	 436 in which case, the inquiry	 will  automatically
revive or (2) that instead of directing any fresh inquiry an
order  committing  the accused for trial to  the  Court	 of
Sessions.   An	order of the second category amounts  to  an
order of commitment and there is no necessity of any further
inquiry at all. [491 E-F, H, 492 A]
3.  The	 first	part of Section	 484  clearly  excludes	 the
application of 1973 code to any appeal, application,  trial,
inquiry	 etc. pending at the time when the 1973	 Code  comes
into  force.  The provision to section- 484 (1)	 (2)  carves
out  an exception to the general rule contained	 in  Section
484(2)	(a) and provides that where a commitment inquiry  is
pending	 at the commencement of the 1973 Code, it is  to  be
governed by 1973 Code and not by 1898 Code.
In the instant case, the High Court has not passed any order
to the effect that the commitment inquiry was to be revived,
but  has in absolutely clear and unequivocal terms  ordered,
"the,	respondent  shall stand committed to  the  Court  of
Sessions  u/s  409." Since by virtue of the High  Court	 the
magistrate  had no control or siesin of the case at  all,the
of  any inquiry pending before him does not arise.  [491  B,
C,E 492 B-C]
489



JUDGMENT:
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 343  of
1977.
(Appeal by Special Leave from the Judgment and Order dt. 21-
10-75  of the Delhi High Court in Criminal Revision No.	 118
of 1973).
A .K. Sen & A. K. Nag for the Appellant.
R. N. Sachthey & S. P. Nayar for Respondent No. 1.
V. Prabha and S. P. Nayar for Respondent No. 2.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
FAZAL  ALI,  J.-This  appeal by special	 leave	is  directed
against	 the judgment of the High Court of Delhi dated	21st
October, 1975 by which the High Court set aside the order of
the  Magistrate discharging the appellant and  directed	 his
commitment to the Court of Session.
The facts of the case have been detailed in the judgment  of
the  High  Court and that of the trial Court and it  is	 not
necessary for us to repeat the same all over again.  It will
be  enough to say that the complainant Pratap Bhanu  Prakash
Singh purchased 27,000 shares of Rohtas Industries which are
entrusted  to the appellant against a loan of Rs. 1.82	lacs
advanced  by the appellant.  Accordingly the allegation	 was
made in the complaint that the appellant committed a  breach
of trust of the amount covered by the shares by selling them
against	  express   directions	 of   the    complainant.The
allegations  were denied by the appellant who put forward  a
plea that there was no entrustment and that the shares	were
pi  iced  in  the hands of the appellant as  security  and
therefore the question of breach of trust did not arise.  In
view of the allegations and counter allegations more by	 the
parties,  we are not inclined to go into the merits  of	 the
case particularly when we propose to uphold the order of the
High  Court  directing commitment of the  appellant  to	 the
Court of Session.  Any observations which may be made by  us
on merits are likely to prejudice either party at the  trial
and  therefore	we refrain from going into  merits  at	this
stage.	We are, however, satisfied that having regard to the
reasons	 given by the High Court it cannot be said that	 the
High  Court  was in error in exercising	 its  discretion  by
setting	  aside	 the  order  of	 discharge   and   directing
commitment to the Court of Session.
It  appears  that  the	appellant was  tried  by  the  trial
Magistrate,  who  after entering into pros and con;  of	 the
case  found that no prima facie case was established and  he
accordingly discharged the appellant by his order dated	 28-
10-1971.   "he complainant unsuccessfully filed	 a  Revision
against	 this  order before the Sessions  Judge,  Delhi	 who
affirmed the order of the Magistrate.  Ultimately the matter
came up in revision before the High Court which after  going
through	 facts	and circumstances of the case found  that  a
prima  facie case for commitment was made out and set  aside
the order of discharge passed
490
by  the	 Magistrate  and upheld by the	Sessions  Judge	 and
directed  that	the appellant be committed to the  Court  of
Session.  Hence this appeal by special leave before us.
Two points were argued by Mr. Ashoke Sen, the leaned counsel
for  the appellant.  In the first place, it was	 urged	that
having regard to the admitted facts and circumstances of the
case  no prima facie case against the accused was  made	 out
and   the  trial  Magistrate  was  therefore  justified	  in
discharging  the appellant and the High Court exceeded	its
jurisdiction  in  reversing the order of discharge  and	 di-
recting	 commitment.  For the reasons that we  have  already
given  it is not possible for us to hold that the  order  of
the High Court suffers High Court suffers from the infirmity
pointed	 out.	The High Court has arrived at a	 finding  of
fact  that  a prima.facie case was made	 out  for  directing
commitment to the Court of Session and this Court would	 not
normally interfere with the discretion exercised by the High
Court.	We would like to point out that under Sec. 213	sub-
cl. (2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (hereinafter
referred  to as the "1898 Code") a Magistrate can  discharge
the accused if he finds that there are no sufficient grounds
for  committing	 the accused.  It is obvious that  the	High
Court has applied its mind to the facts and circumstances of
the  case and it is not for this Court in appeal by  special
leave  to go into the sufficiency or insufficiency  of	the,
material   before   the	 Magistrate  which  may	  afford   a
justification  for passing an order of discharge.  In  these
circumstances the first argument put forward by the  learned
counsel	 for the appellant is overruled and we refrain	from
saying anything more on this aspect.
The second argument of Mr. Ashoke was that even if the	High
Court  was right in directing commitment, by  setting  aside
the order of discharge the position will be that by  virtue
of  a  legal  fiction,	the  commitment	 proceedings   which
culminated in the discharge of the appellant would revive so
as  to	attract	 the  operation	 of  the  Code	of  Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as the "1973 Code")
as  a result of which the case against the  appellant  would
cease  to be one which would be exclusively triable  by	 the
Sessions  Court	 and  therefore	 the  Magistrate  would	  be
competent to try the, case himself under the 1973 Code.	  In
order  to  appreciate the argument advanced by	the  learned
counsel	 for  the appellant it may be necessary	 to  extract
the,  relevant	portion	 of the- 1973  Code.   The  relevant
section 484 runs thus :-
	      "484(1) The Code of Criminal Procedure,  1898,
	      is  hereby repealed, (2) Notwithstanding	such
	      repeal,
	      (a) if, immediately before the ate on which a&
	      Code  comes  into force, there is	 any  appeal
	      application,  trial, inquiry or  investigation
	      pending,	then  ,	 such  appeal,	application,
	      trial,  inquiry  or  investigation  shall	  be
	      disposed	of, continued, held or made, as	 the
	      case   may   be,	in  accordance with   the
	      provisions of the C de of Criminal  Procedure,
	      1898,  as	 'in force immediately	before	such
	      commence-
491
	      ment,  (hereinafter  referred to as  the	"Old
	      Code'),  as  if this Code had  not  come	into
	      force :
	      Provided	that  every  inquiry  under  Chapter
	      XVIII of the Old Code, which is pending at the
	      commencement of this Code, shall be dealt with
	      and   disposed  of  in  accordance  with	 the
	      provisions of this Code."
The  first  part  of  this  section  clearly  excludes	 the
application  of	 the 1973 Code to  any	appeal	application,
trial,	inquiry etc. pending at the time when the 1973	Code
comes into force.  The provisio to sec. 484(1) & (2) however
carves	out  an exception to the general rule  contained  in
section	 484(2)	 (a) and provides that	where  a  commitment
inquiry	 is pending at the commencement of the 1973 Code  it
is  to be governed by the 1973 Code and not the	 1898  Code.
It  was thus argued that the moment the order  of  discharge
passed	by  the	 Magistrate was	 set  aside  the  commitment
inquiry	 revived  and would be deemed to be pending  on	 the
date on which the order of the High Court was passed that is
to  say 21-10-1975 and thereafter the inquiry would have  to
be  regulated  by the provisions of the 1973 Code.   It	 was
argued that under the 1973 Code a case under section 409  is
not exclusively triable by Sessions Court but is triable  by
a  First  Class Magistrate and therefore there would  be  no
question  of commitment of the case to the Court of  Session
but the Magistrate would have to try the case himself as  he
was  competent	to  do so being a Magistrate  of  the  First
Class.	We have examined this argument carefully but we	 are
unable to accede to the same.  The High Court has not passed
any  order to the effect that the commitment inquiry was  to
be  revived  but has, in absolutely  clear  and	 unequivocal
terms,	ordered "that the respondent 'shall stand  committed
to  the Court of Session under sec. 409'  view of the  order
passed	by  the High Court there is  no	 question  of  any
inquiry being received.	 Moreover, it would appear from	 the
perusal	 of  sec. 437 of the 1898 Code that  the  revisional
Court  in hearing a revision against an order  of  discharge
passed the Magistrate may direct Commitment without any	 in-
quiry  at  all or he may direct a fresh	 inquiry.   In	this
connection  the relevant portion of section 437 of the	.898
Code runs as follows :-
	      "When  on	 examining the record  of  any	case
	      under s. 435 or otherwise, the Sessions  Judge
	      or  District  Magistrate considers  that	such
	      case  is triable exclusively by the  Court  of
	      Session  and that an accused person  has	been
	      improperly  discharged by the inferior  Court,
	      the Sessions Judge or District Magistrate	 may
	      cause  him to be arrested, and may  thereupon,
	      instead of directing t fresh inquiry order him
	      to  be committed for trial upon tie matter  of
	      which  he	 has  been, in the  opinion  of	 the
	      Sessions	 Judge	 or   District	 Magistrate,
	      improperly discharged".
It  therefore, manifestly clear that there are	two  courses
open  to  the revisional court (1) either to set  aside	 the
order  of  discharge and direct a fresh inquiry to  be	made
under section 436 in which,
492
case  the  inquiry  will automatically revive  or  (2)	that
instead	 of  directing	any  fresh  inquiry  pass  an  order
committing  the accused for trial to the Court	of  Session.
An  order  of the, second category amounts to  an  order  of
commitment and there is no necessity of any further  inquiry
at  all.   In  the instant case as the High  Court  did	 not
choose	to order any further inquiry but directed  that	 the
accused	 will  stand committed to the Court of	Session	 the
question  of revival of the inquiry does not arise  at	all.
Indeed,	 if  the  High Court  would  have  directed  further
inquiry into the matter then the matter would have gone back
to  the	 Magistrate  and the  original	inquiry	 would	have
revived	 in terms of the order of the High Court.   In	that
case,  no  doubt, the 1973 Code may have  applied.   In	 the
instant case since by virtue of the order of the High  Court
the  Magistrate had no control or siesin of the case at	 all
the  question  of any inquiry pending before  him  does	 not
arise.	For these reasons, therefore, we overrule the second
contention put forward by Mr. Ashoke Sen.
The  result  is that the appeal fails and is dismissed.	  As
the case is old,    the	  Sessions  Court  will	  give	 top
priority to this case and dispose it	of   as	  early	  as
possible in accordance with law.
S. R.				 Appeal dismissed.
493




