

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Banarsi Dass Chadha & Bros vs L.T. Governor, Delhi Admn. & Ors on 21 August, 1978Equivalent citations: 1978 AIR 1587, 1979 SCR  (1) 271
Author: O C Reddy
Bench: Reddy, O. Chinnappa (J)
           PETITIONER:
BANARSI DASS CHADHA & BROS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
L.T. GOVERNOR, DELHI ADMN. & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT21/08/1978

BENCH:
REDDY, O. CHINNAPPA (J)
BENCH:
REDDY, O. CHINNAPPA (J)
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
DESAI, D.A.

CITATION:
 1978 AIR 1587		  1979 SCR  (1) 271
 1978 SCC  (4)	11


ACT:
     Mines and	Minerals (Regulation  and Development)	Act,
1957, S.  3(e)-Brick-earth. whether  a minor mineral. within
the meaning  of that  expression 'Minor Mineral', as defined
in s. 3(e).



HEADNOTE:
     S. 3(e)  of  the  Mines  and  Mineral  (Regulation	 and
Development) Act,  1957 defines	 "'Minor Mineral' as meaning
building stones,  gravel, ordinary clay, ordinary sand other
than sand  used	 for  prescribed  purposes,  and  any  other
mineral which the Central Government may, by Notification in
the official  Gazette declare  to be  a minor  mineral".  In
exercise of  the power	conferred by  s. 3(e) of the Act the
Central Government  declared  inter-alia  brick-earth  as  a
'minor mineral'.
     Dismissing the appeal by special leave the Court
^
     HELD: (  I )  The word  'mineral' has  no fixed  but  a
contextual connotation. If 'mineral' is not a term of art it
is a  word of  common parlance,	 capable of  multiplicity of
meanings  depending   upon  the	  context.   The   word	  is
occasionally used  in  a  very	wide  sense  to	 denote	 any
substance that	neither animal nor vegetable Sometimes it is
used in	 a narrow sense to mean no more than precious metals
like gold  and silver.	Again the  word 'minerals'  is often
used to	 indicate substances  obtained from  underneath	 the
surface of  the earth  by digging or quarrying. though it is
not always so. [273 A-C, 274 F]
     In the  context of	 the 'Mines and Minerals (Regulation
and Development)  Act, the  word Mineral  is  of  sufficient
amplitude to  include brick-earth.  If the expression 'minor
mineral' as defined in the Act, includes 'ordinary clay` and
'ordinary sand'.  there is no earthly reason why brick-earth
should not  be held  to be 'any other mineral' which may, be
declared as a 'minor mineral'. [1275 B-C]
     Bhagwan Das  v. State.  Of	 U.P.,	[1976]	3  SCR	869,
applied
     Laddu Mal	v. State  of Bihar,  AIR 1965 Pat. 491; Amar
Modilal Singh  v. State	 of Haryana,  AIR  1972	 Punjab	 and
Haryana 356;  Sharma &	Co. v.	State of U.P., AIR 1975 All.
386 approved.
     State of  West Bengal v. Jagdamba Prasad, AIR 1969 Cal.
281; overruled.
     Todd Birleston  & Co. v. The North Eastern Railway Co.,
[1903] I K.B. 603; quoted with approval.
     (2) A  substance must  first be a mineral before it can
be notified  as a minor mineral pursuant to the power vested
in the	Central Government  under s. 3(e) of the Act. Brick-
earth being  a mineral. the Central Government has correctly
notified it as a 'minor mineral'. [272 G-H]
272



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 1 278 of
1978.
     Appeal by special leave from the Judgment and Order 15-
11-1976 of  the Delhi  High Court  in Civil  Writ No.  96 of
1971.
     B. Dutta for the Appellant.
     Soli J. Sorabjee, Addl. Sol. General and R. N. Sachthey
for Respondents 1 and 2.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     CHINNAPPA REDDY,  J.-We granted special leave and heard
arguments on the limited question whether "brick-earth" is a
'minor mineral'	 within the  meaning of	 that expression  as
defined	 in   Section  3  (e)  of  the	Mines  and  Minerals
(Regulation and Development') Act. 1957.
     The definition is as follows:
	  "Minor mineral'  means  building  stones,  gravel?
     ordinary clay,  ordinary sand  other than sand used for
     prescribed purposes,  and any  other mineral  which the
     Central Government may, by Notification in the official
     Gazette declare to be minor mineral ;"
In exercise  of the  power conferred  by Section 3(e) of the
Act, the  Central Government declared the following minerals
to be minor minerals
	  "Boulder, Shingle,  Chalcedony  pebbles  used	 for
     ball mill purposes only, limeshell kanker and limestone
     used for  lime burning,  murrum, brick-earth,  fuller's
     earth, bentonite road metal, reh-matti, slate and shale
     when used for building material;"
     The submission of the learned Counsel for the appellant
was that  a substance had to be a mineral before it could be
notified as  a minor  mineral pursuant	to the	power  under
Section 3(e)  of the  Miens  and  Minerals  (Regulation	 and
Development) Act,  1957. He urged that brick-earth was not a
mineral and,  therefore, it  could not	be notified  a minor
mineral.
     We agree with the learned Counsel that a substance must
first be  a mineral  before it	can be	notified as  a minor
mineral	 pursuant   to	the  power  vested  in	the  Central
Government under  Section 3(e)	of the	Act.  The  question,
therefore,  is	 whether  brick-earth	is  a  mineral.	 The
expression  "Minor  Mineral"  as  defined  in  Section	3(e)
includes  'ordinary   clay'  and  'ordinary  sand'.  If	 the
expression "minor mineral" as defined in Section 3(e) of the
Act includes 'ordinary clay' and
273
     `ordinary sand',  there is no reason why earth used for
the purpose  A of  making bricks  should not be comprehended
within the meaning of the word "any other mineral" which may
be declared as a "minor mineral" by the Government. The word
"mineral" is  not a  term of  art. It  is a  word of  common
parlance, capable  of a	 multiplicity of  meaning  depending
upon the context. For example the word is  occasionally used
in a very wide sense to denote any substance that is neither
animal nor vegetable. Sometimes it is used in a narrow sense
to mean	 no more than precious metalls like gold and silver.
Again,	the  word  "minerals"  is  often  used	to  indicate
substances obtain-  . ed  from underneath the surface of the
earth by  digging or quarrying. But this is not always so as
pointed out  by Chandrachud,  J (as  he then was) in Bhagwan
Dass v.	 State of  Uttar Pradesh,(1) where the learned judge
said (at p. 874):
	  'It  was  urged  that	 the  sand  and	 gravel	 are
     deposited on  the surface of the land and not under the
     surface of the soil and therefore they cannot be called
     minerals and  equally so,	any operation  by which they
     are collected  or gathered	 cannot properly be called a
     minerals operation.  It is	 in the first place wrong to
     assume that  mines and minerals must always be sub-soil
     and that there can be no minerals on the surface of the
     earth. Such  an  assumption  is  contrary	to  informed
     experience. In  any  case,	 the  definition  of  mining
     operations and  minor minerals  in section 3(d) and (e)
     of the  Act of  1957 and Rule 2(S) and (7) of the Rules
     of 1963  shows that  minerals need	 not be subterranean
     and  that	 mining	 operations  cover  every  operation
     undertaken for  the  purpose  of  "Winning"  any  minor
     mineral.  "Winning"  does	not  imply  a  hazardous  or
     perilous activity.	 The word  simply means extracting a
     mineral"  and  is	used  generally	 to  indicate,-	 any
     activity by which a mineral is secured. "Extracting" in
     turn  means  drawing  out	or  obtaining.	A  tooth  is
     'extracted' as much as the fruit juice and as much as a
     mineral. Only  that the  effort varies  from  tooth  to
     tooth,  from   fruit  to  fruit  and  from	 mineral  to
     mineral".
     We may  also refer	 to Northern Pacific Railway Company
v. John	 A. Sodrberg(2)	 where the  Supreme Court  of United
States observed as follows (at page 581):
	  "The word  'mineral' is  used in  so many  senses,
     dependant	upon   the  context,   that   the   ordinary
     definitions of  the dictionary  throw but	little light
     upon its significance in a
(1) [1976] 3 S.C.R. 869.		    (2) 47 L. Fd.575
274
     given case. Thus, the scientific division of all matter
     into the animal, vegetable, or mineral kingdom would be
     absurd as	applied to a grant of lands, since all lands
     belong to the mineral kingdom, and therefore, could not
     be excepted from the grant without being destructive of
     it. Upon  the other  hand,	 a  definition	which  would
     confine it to the precious metals-gold and silver-would
     so limit its application as to destroy at once half the
     value of the exception. Equally subversive of the grant
     would be  the  definition	of  minerals  found  in	 the
     Century Dictionary:  as "any constituent of the earth's
     crust" ; and that of Beinbridge on Mines: "All the Sub-
     stances stances  that now form, or which once formed, a
     part of  the solid	 body  of  the	earth".	 Nor  do  we
     approximate much  more closely  to the  meaning of	 the
     word by  treating	minerals  as  substances  which	 are
     ""mined"" as  distinguished from  those are "quarried",
     since many valuable deposits of gold, copper, iron, and
     coal lie  upon or	near the  surface of  the earth, and
     some of  the most	valuable building  stone,  such	 for
     instance, as  the Caen  stone in  France, is  excavated
     from  mines  running  far	beneath	 the  surface.	This
     distinction  between   under  ground   mines  and	open
     workings was  expressly repudiated	 in  Midland  C.  v.
     Haunchwood Brick  & Tile  Co. (L.R 20 Ch. Div. 552) and
     in Hext v. Gill (L.R. 7 Ch. 699)"
     The Supreme  Court of  United States  also referred  to
several English	 cases where stone for road making or paving
was held  to be 'minerals' as also granite, sandstone, flint
stone, gravel,	marble, fire clay, brick clay, and the like.
It is  clear that  the word  'mineral' has  no fixed  but  a
contextual connotation.
     The learned  Counsel  for	the  appellant	invited	 our
attention to  the decision  of the  Court of  Appeal in Todd
Birleston and Co. v. The North Eastern Railway Co.(l) and to
Stoud's Judicial  Dictionary to	 urge that clay, brick-earth
and the	 like have sometimes been held not to be minerals by
English Courts.	 As we	said earlier  the word mineral is an
elastic word whose meaning depends upon the setting in which
it is  used. For  instance, in	the case cited, the question
was  whether  clay  forming  the  surface  or  subsoil,	 and
constituting the  "land" compulsorily taken for the purposes
of a railway, was not a mineral WITH the meaning of Sections
77, 78	or 79  of the Railway Clauses Consolidation Act. The
answer was that 'clay' was not a mineral for
 the  purposes of the Railway Clauses Consolidation Act. Any
other conclusion,  in the context of the Act, would have led
to the absurd
(1) [1903] I K.B. 603 .
275
result that  the original  owner whose	land had  been taken
would be  entitled to  dig and	take away  the clay from the
land on	 which the  Railway was	 constructed, thus defeating
the very object of the compulsory taking. On the other hand,
as noticed  by the  Supreme Court  of the  United States, in
several English	 cases clay,  gravel, sand,  stone etc.	 has
been held  to be  minerals. That  is why  we  say  the	word
mineral has  no	 definite  meaning  but	 has  a	 variety  of
meanings, depending  on the  context  of  its  use.  In	 the
context of the Mines and Minerals (Regulation & Development)
Act, we	 have no`  doubt  that	the  word  'mineral'  is  of
sufficient amplitude  to include  'brick-earth'. As  already
observed y  us, if the expression 'minor mineral' as defined
in the	Act includes  'ordinary clay'  and 'ordinary  sand'.
there is  no earthly  reason why 'brick-earth' should not be
held to	 be 'any  other mineral'  which may  be declared  as
'minor mineral..  We do not think it necessary to pursue the
matter further except to say that this was The view taken in
Laddu Mal  v. State  of Bihar(l) Amar Singh Modilal v. State
of Haryana(2)  and Sharma  & Co.  v. State of U.P.(3). We do
not agree  with the view of the Calcutta High Court in State
of West	 Bengal v.  Jagadamba Prasad (4) that because speaks
of 'ordinary  earth' as	 a mineral it is not a minor mineral
as  defined   in  the	Mines  and  Minerals  (Regulation  &
Development) Act.  The appeal  is accordingly dismissed with
costs.
S.R.					    Appeal dismissed
(1) A.I.R 1965 Patna 491
(2) A.I.R 1972 Punj. & Har. 356
(3) A.I.R.. 1975 All. 86. .
(4) A.I.R.. 1969 Cal. 2XI.
276




