

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Badri Prasad vs Dy. Director Of Consolidation And ... on 1 August, 1978Equivalent citations: 1978 AIR 1557, 1979 SCR  (1)	  1
Author: V Krishnaiyer
Bench: Krishnaiyer, V.R.
           PETITIONER:
BADRI PRASAD

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
DY. DIRECTOR OF CONSOLIDATION AND ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT01/08/1978

BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
DESAI, D.A.
REDDY, O. CHINNAPPA (J)

CITATION:
 1978 AIR 1557		  1979 SCR  (1)	  1
 1978 SCC  (3) 527
 CITATOR INFO :
 R	    1989 SC1872	 (4)


ACT:
     Presumption in favour of valid marriage, law regarding-
Law leans  in  favour  of  legitimacy-Proof  by	 eye-witness
evidence after half a century not permissible.



HEADNOTE:
     Dismissing the special leave petition, the Court
^
     HELD: If  man and woman who live as husband and wife in
society are  compelled to  prove,  after  half-a-century  of
wedlock by  eye-witness	 evidence  that	 they  were  validly
married fifty  years earlier,  few will	 succeed. ` A strong
presumption arises  in favour of wed-lock where the partners
have lived  together for  a long  spell as husband and wife.
Although the  presumption IS rebuttable, a heavy burden lies
on him	who seeks  to deprive  the relationship of its legal
origin. Law  leans in  favour of  legitimacy and frowns upon
bastardy. [1 F-H]



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Special  Leave  Petition
(Civil) Nos. 1731 and 927 of 1978.
     From the  Judgment	 and  order  dated  3-11-76  of	 the
Allahabad High Court (Lucknow Bench) in W.P. 116 of 1971 and
from the  Judgment and	order dated  5-8-77 of the Allahabad
High Court (Lucknow Bench) in Revision Application No. 29/77
respectively.
     R. K.  Garg, Madan	 Mohan and  V. J.  Francis  for	 the
Petitioner.
     The order of the Court was delivered by
     KRISHNA IYER,  J.-For around  50 years,  a	 man  and  a
woman, as  the facts  in this  case unfold, lived as husband
and wife. An adventurist challenge to the factum of marriage
between the  two, by  the petitioner  in this  special leave
petition, has  been negatived  by the  High Court.  A strong
presumption arises  in favour of wed-lock where the partners
have lived  together for  a long  spell as husband and wife.
Although the  presumption is rebuttable, a heavy burden lies
on him	who seeks  to  deprive	the  relationship  of  legal
origin. Law  leans in  favour of  legitimacy and frowns upon
bastardy. In this view, the contention of Shri Garg, for the
petitioner, that  long after  the alleged marriage, evidence
has not	 been produced	to sustain its ceremonial process by
examining  the	 priest	 or  other  witnesses,	deserves  no
consideration. If man and woman who live as husband and wife
in society  are compelled to prove, half a century later, by
eye-witness evidence  that they	 were validly  married,	 few
will succeed. The contention deserves to be negatived and we
do so  without hesitation.  The special	 leave petitions are
dismissed.
S.R.					Petitions dismissed.
2




