

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Lakshmi Ammal vs Madhavakrishnan (K. N.) And Ors on 7 August, 1978Equivalent citations: 1978 AIR 1607, 1979 SCR  (1)	 68
Author: V Krishnaiyer
Bench: Krishnaiyer, V.R.
           PETITIONER:
LAKSHMI AMMAL

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
MADHAVAKRISHNAN (K. N.) AND ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT07/08/1978

BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
DESAI, D.A.
REDDY, O. CHINNAPPA (J)

CITATION:
 1978 AIR 1607		  1979 SCR  (1)	 68
 1978 SCC  (4)	15


ACT:
     Court  Fees  and  Suit  Valuation	Act,  (Central	Act)
Section 17-D-Read  Wit/l Civil	Procedure Code, (Act V) 1908
order VII Rules 1 (i) and 11 (b)-Duty of the Court regarding
the Court fee to be paid .



HEADNOTE:
     The appellant  paid the correct court fee under Section
37(2) of  the Madras  Court Fees  and  Suits  Valuation	 Act
clearly alleging  in para  14 of  the plaint  that she is in
joint possession  and  is  seeking  partition  and  separate
possession of  her half share in the suit properties as heir
of deceased  Paramayee. The  preliminary objection as to the
correct court  fee payable  raised and	taken up resulted in
the final appeal before this court.
     Allowing the appeal by Special Leave, the Court
^
     HELD: (a)	Courts should be anxious to grapple with the
real issues and not spend their energies on peripheral ones.
[68H, 69A]
     (b) Court fee, if it seriously restricts the right of a
person to  seek his  remedies in Courts of justice should be
strictly construed.  Since access to justice is the basis of
the legal  system, where  there is  a doubt,  reasonable  of
course, the  benefit must go to him who says that the lesser
court fee alone be paid. [69A]
     In the  instant case,  the court fee that is payable is
under s.37(2)  of the  State Act,  which corresponds to Art.
17-D of	 the Court Fees & Suits Valuation Central Act, which
is the predecessor legislation on the subject. [69C]



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 1264 of
1978.
     Appeal by	Special Leave  from the	 Judgment and  order
dated 11-8-1976.  Of the  Madras  High	Court  in  CRP.	 No.
2084/76.
     K. S.  Ramamurthy, A.  T. M.  Sampath, S. Gopalakrishna
and A. N. Ramjani for the Appellant.
     K. Jayaram	 and K. A. Bala Subramaniam and K. Ram Kumar
for the Respondents.
			   ORDER
     Leave granted.
     It is  unfortunate that  long years  have been spent by
the courts  below on  a combat	between two  parties on	 the
question of  court fee	leaving the real issues to be fought
between them  to come  up leisurely.  Two things  have to be
made clear. Courts should be anxious to
69
grapple with the real issues and not spend their energies on
peripheral A  ones. Secondly,  court fee,  if  it  seriously
restricts the  rights of  a person  to seek  his remedies in
courts of  justice, should  be strictly construed. After all
access to  justice is the basis of the legal system. In that
view, where  there is  a doubt,	 reasonable of	course,	 the
benefit must  go to  him who  says that the lesser court fee
alone be paid.
     In this  particular case there is hardly any difficulty
in holding  that the plaintiff in paragraph 14 of the plaint
has clearly  alleged that sh., is in joint possession and is
seeking partition  and separate possession of her half share
in the	suit properties	 as  heir  of  deceased,  Paramayee.
Obviously, the	court fee  that is  payable is	as  she	 has
claimed, namely	 under sec.  37(2) which corresponds to Art.
17(b)  of   the	 Central   Act,	 which	is  the	 predecessor
legislation on the subject. We allow the appeal and send the
case back  to the  trial court	and  direct  that  court  to
proceed with  the suit	expeditiously. We make it clear that
our decision  on the question of court fee does not have any
implications  on   the	merits	including  the	validity  or
otherwise of the Will. No costs.
S.R.					      Appeal allowed
70




