

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Lakshmi Narain And Others vs District Excise Officer, ... on 16 August, 1978Equivalent citations: 1978 AIR 1476, 1979 SCR  (1) 161
Author: V Krishnaiyer
Bench: Krishnaiyer, V.R.
           PETITIONER:
LAKSHMI NARAIN AND OTHERS

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
DISTRICT EXCISE OFFICER, FATEHPUR & ORS

DATE OF JUDGMENT16/08/1978

BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
DESAI, D.A.
REDDY, O. CHINNAPPA (J)

CITATION:
 1978 AIR 1476		  1979 SCR  (1) 161


ACT:
     U.P. Excise  Act- Section	41(e)(v) & U P. Excise Rules
138-Valid and not unconstitutional.
     Constitution  of  India  1950-  Article  32-  petitions
under-petitioners participating	 in  an	 auction  with	full
knowledge of conditions if could object to condition.
     Section 41(e)(v)  of the  U.P. Excise Act empowered the
Excise Commissioner  to make rules fixing the days and hours
during which licensed premises may be kept open or closed:



HEADNOTE:
     The petitioners  who were	licensees in  sale of liquor
challenged the validity of the rule.
     Dismissing the writ petition,
^
     HELD: l.  As the  provisions of  Rule 13B	of the	U.P.
Excise Rules  are in pari materia with Rule 37 of the Punjab
liquor Licence	Rules 1956, the decision in P. N. Kaushal v.
Union of  India etc. [1979] 1 S.C.R. 122 is applicable. [161
G]
     2. The  licences were awarded at public auction and the
conditions regarding  closure of  business on  certain	days
were printed  in the  auction notice. With full knowledge of
these  restrictions   which   the   petitioners	  considered
reasonable when They participated in the bids, they took the
licences. They cannot assail the same in the writ petitions.
[162F-G]
     (For appearance refer to pages 125-126).
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by



JUDGMENT:
     KRISHNA IYER,  J. We  have today disposed of a batch of
writ of	 petitions arising under the Punjab Excise Act, 1914
(Annexure A).  There  the  petitioner  had  challenged	Sec.
59(f)(v) and  rule 37  as unconstitutional.  In the  present
batch of  writ petitions  'he contention is identical except
that the  enactment and	 rule are  formally different but in
pari materia.  Sec. 41(e)(v) of the U.P. Excise Act empowers
the Excise  Commissioner to  make rules	 fixing the days and
hours during  which licensed  premises may be kept opened or
closed. Rule  13 is  one such  rule which  forbids  sale  of
liquor "of  all Tuesdays  as well  as the first day of every
month`'. Aggrieved  by- rule  13 (as  amended),	 because  it
prohibits liquor  trade	 on  the  1st  of  every  month	 the
petitioners, who  are licensees,  have come up to this Court
challenging its vires. Rule 13 reads thus:
162
	  "13B. All  excise shops  (including foreign liquor
     country spirit,  home drugs,  opium (tari	and outstill
     shops) shall  not be  kept	 open  on  Independence	 day
     (August 15)  Mahatma Ghana	 Birthday (October 2) and on
     the day  of Mahatma  Gandhi's tragic death (January 30)
     every year	 an(l also on all Tuesdays as well as on the
     first day of every month.
	  Provided that if the first day of the month happen
     to be  a public holiday, the day next following of that
     month shall  be the day on which the excise shops shall
     not be kept open. Provided further Excise Commissioner,
     may in  consultation with the Collector of the District
     concerned,	 waive	the  condition	of  not	 keeping  an
     exercise shop  open on Tuesday; or the first day of the
     month or  the day	next following of that month, as the
     case may  be, for such specified period as he may think
     fit, in the case of hotels possessing a licence in Form
     F.L. for  the sale of foreign liquor for the benefit of
     such foreign  tourists as may hold a valid permit under
     the All India liquor permit scheme of the Government of
     India.'
     The source	 of the	 rule-making power  is Sec. 11(c)(v)
which hardly needs reproduction.
     It is  easy to  see that  the provisions  in the Punjab
Law, challenged	 unsuccessfully before	us, and	 these	U.P.
provisions are	virtually  the	same.  The  contentions	 put
forward by  counsel for	 the petitioners and the submissions
by the	Solicitor General  and shri  O. P. Rana in reply are
also identical with what we have heard and considered in the
Punjab cases. Indeed, the U.P. cases, from the point of view
of the State, are stronger because the licences were awarded
at public auctions and all the conditions now objected to in
these  writ  petitions	regarding  closure  of	business  on
certain days  are printed  in the  auction notice. With full
knowledge  of  these  restrictions,  which  they  considered
reasonable when	 they participated in the bids (and which we
consider reasonable  for reasons we have given in the Punjab
cases), they  took the	licences. So their present challenge
must meet with its Waterloo in the decision of this Court in
the Punjab  Cases. Without  more ado,  we dismiss  the	Writ
Petitions with costs (one hearing fee).
N.V.K.					 Pettions dismissed.
163




