

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
U.O.I. Thr. Cbi vs Nirala Yadav@Raja Ram ... on 30 June, 1948Author: D Misra
Bench: Dipak Misra, N.V. Ramana
                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                      CRIMINAL APPEALLATE JURISDICTION

                       CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 786 OF 2010

Union of India through C.B.I.                      … Appellant

                                   Versus

Nirala Yadav @ Raja Ram Yadav
@ Deepak Yadav                               …Respondent


                               J U D G M E N T

Dipak Misra, J.

      The present appeal, by special leave, is directed  against  the  order
dated 4.3.2008 passed by the learned Single  Judge  of  the  High  Court  of
Judicature at Patna in Criminal  Misc.  No.  44042  of  2007  enlarging  the
respondent on bail solely on the ground that he was entitled to the  benefit
under the proviso appended to Section  167(2)  CrPC  of  Criminal  Procedure
(for short “the CrPC”).

The antecedent essential facts are that the respondent was arraigned  as  an
accused in Nauhatta P.S. case No. 4/02 for  the  offences  punishable  under
Sections 302, 304, 353, 323, 149, 148 and  147  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code
(IPC), under Section 27 of the  Arms  Act  and  under  Section  49(2)(b)  of
Prevention of Terrorist Activities Act (POTA) for  murder  of  Sanjay  Kumar
Singh, Divisional Forest Officer.  Initially the investigation  was  carried
out by the local investigating agency  and  thereafter,  the  Government  of
India, Ministry of Personnel, New Delhi, issued a notification No. 228/9/02-
AVD/II dated 21.3.2002 handing over the investigation to the Central  Bureau
of Investigation (CBI) after obtaining the  consent  of  the  Government  of
Bihar.

As per the allegations of the prosecution, on 15.2.2002 the deceased  Sanjay
Kumar Singh, Divisional Forest Officer, Shahabad Division  with  Headquarter
at Sasaram, was on a surprise check in village Rehal, District Rohtas  along
with his subordinate staff and, at that juncture, he  was  surrounded  by  a
group of 25-30 unknown naxalites and was taken outside the village and  when
he declined to comply with the illegal demand of the naxalites  for  payment
of rupees five lakhs for his release, he was taken inside the  forest  where
he was shot dead.  After the criminal law was set in motion on the basis  of
an FIR, the investigation commenced.

In course of investigation, the respondent was arrested and was sent to  the
judicial custody on 5.12.2006.  As the  charge-sheet  was  not  filed  after
lapse of the statutory period of ninety days, on  14.3.2007  the  respondent
filed an application under Section 167(2) CrPC for release on  bail  on  the
foundation that in the absence of challan on record he was  entitled  to  be
admitted to bail after completion of ninety days from his  date  of  arrest.
On 15.3.2007, an application was filed by the CBI under Section 49(2)(b)  of
POTA seeking extension of time for a period of thirty days, but on that  day
no order was passed on that application and the learned Special Judge  asked
the defence to file a reply in rejoinder to the  application  for  extension
but did not pass any order on the application for grant of bail.

As the factual matrix would unfurl, charge-sheet  was  filed  on  26.3.2007.
On 3.4.2007 the learned Special Judge  extended  the  time  for  filing  the
charge-sheet till the date of such filing, i.e., 26.3.2007 and rejected  the
application of the respondent.  Being unsuccessful in  getting  admitted  to
bail, the accused-respondent approached the High  Court  in  Criminal  Misc.
No. 44042  of  2007  and  the  learned  single  Judge  who  dealt  with  the
application, after referring to the decision in Hitendra  Vishnu  Thakur  v.
State of Maharahstra[1] and placing reliance on the dictum in Uday  Mohanlal
Acharya v. State of Maharahstra[2], came to hold that the right had  already
accrued to the respondent on 14.3.2007 when he  had  moved  the  application
for grant of  bail  and,  accordingly,  admitted  him  to  bail  on  certain
conditions.

We have heard Mr. P.K. Dey,  learned  counsel  for  the  appellant  and  Ms.
Prerna Singh, learned counsel for the respondent.

Calling in question the legal acceptability of the order,  it  is  submitted
by Mr. Day that the  High  Court  has  been  totally  misguided  by  placing
reliance upon the law laid down in Harindra Vishnu  Thakur  (supra)  without
apprising itself about the Constitution Bench decision  in  Sanjay  Dutt  v.
State[3] which makes the order unsustainable.  It is urged by him that  when
the application for bail was filed on the ground that the  charge-sheet  was
not filed within ninety days, and the said application  was  not  considered
and no order was passed by the learned trial Judge before  the  charge-sheet
was filed, the indefeasible right that vested in  an  accused,  got  totally
destroyed, but, unfortunately, the High Court has failed to  appreciate  the
said legal principle which makes the impugned order  sensitively  untenable.
It is his further submission that the learned single  Judge  has  failed  to
apply the correct principle on the right of “compulsive  bail”  inasmuch  as
such a right should be available on the date the bail application  is  taken
up for consideration but not on  the  date  of  its  presentation.   He  has
commended us to the decisions in Sanjay  Dutt  (supra),  State  of  M.P.  v.
Rustam & ors.[4], Bipin Shantilal Panchal v.  State  of  Gujarat[5],  Dinesh
Dalmia v. CBI[6], Mustaq Ahmed Isak v. State of Maharashtra[7]  and  Pragyna
Singh Thakur v. State of Maharashtra[8].

Ms. Prerna Singh, learned counsel appearing for the respondent, per  contra,
has contended that the controversy is squarely covered by  the  decision  in
Uday Mohanlal Acharya (supra) and as the High Court has based  its  decision
on the  same  in  the  backdrop  of  the  factual  scenario,  the  order  is
absolutely defensible and does not  suffer  from  any  infirmity  warranting
interference.   She  would  further  submit  that  the  indefeasible   right
available to the accused cannot be extinguished  by  filing  an  application
for extension of time to file the charge-sheet after expiry of  the  initial
period and filing the same  after  certain  period,  for  if  such  kind  of
allowance is  conferred,  the  purpose  of  the  provision  engrafted  under
Section 167(2) CrPC would be frustrated.

At the outset it is necessary to state that the facts  are  not  in  dispute
and, therefore, we are obliged to advert to the law and adjudge whether  the
High Court has correctly applied the legal principles.  As  we  notice  from
the impugned order the learned single Judge has referred to the decision  in
Hatindra Vishnu Thakur (supra).  In the said  case  the  Court  had  dwelled
upon the import of Section 20(4)  of  Terrorist  and  Disruptive  Activities
(Prevention) Act, 1987 read with Section 167 CrPC and came to hold that: -
“… we find that once the period for filing the charge-sheet has expired  and
either no extension under clause (bb) has been  granted  by  the  Designated
Court or the period of extension has also expired, the accused person  would
be entitled to move an application for being admitted  to  bail  under  sub-
section (4) of Section 20 TADA read with Section 167 of  the  Code  and  the
Designated Court shall release him on bail, if the accused seeks  to  be  so
released and furnishes the requisite bail. We are  not  impressed  with  the
argument of the learned counsel for the appellant that on the expiry of  the
period during which investigation is required to be completed under  Section
20(4) TADA read with Section 167 of the Code, the  court  must  release  the
accused on bail on its own motion  even  without  any  application  from  an
accused person on his offering to furnish bail. In our  opinion  an  accused
is required to make an application if he wishes to be released  on  bail  on
account of the ‘default’ of the investigating/prosecuting  agency  and  once
such an application is made, the court should issue a notice to  the  public
prosecutor who may either show that the prosecution has obtained  the  order
for extension for completion of investigation from the  court  under  clause
(bb) or that the challan has been filed in the Designated Court  before  the
expiry of the prescribed period or  even  that  the  prescribed  period  has
actually not expired and thus resist  the  grant  of  bail  on  the  alleged
ground of ‘default’. The issuance of notice would avoid the  possibility  of
an accused [pic]obtaining an order of bail under  the  ‘default’  clause  by
either deliberately or inadvertently  concealing  certain  facts  and  would
avoid multiplicity of proceedings. It would, therefore, serve  the  ends  of
justice if both sides are heard on a petition for grant of bail  on  account
of the prosecution’s ‘default’. Similarly, when a  report  is  submitted  by
the public prosecutor to the Designated Court for grant of  extension  under
clause (bb), its notice should be issued  to  the  accused  before  granting
such an extension so that an accused may have an opportunity to  oppose  the
extension on all legitimate and legal grounds available to him. It  is  true
that neither clause (b) nor clause (bb) of sub-section  (4)  of  Section  20
TADA specifically provide for the issuance of  such  a  notice  but  in  our
opinion the issuance of such a notice must be  read  into  these  provisions
both in the interest of the accused and  the  prosecution  as  well  as  for
doing complete justice between the parties.”

      After so stating, the Court proceeded to observe as follows: -
“We must as already noticed reiterate that the objection  to  the  grant  of
bail to an accused on  account  of  the  ‘default’  of  the  prosecution  to
complete the investigation and file the challan within  the  maximum  period
prescribed under clause (b) of sub-section (4) of Section 20 TADA or  within
the extended period as envisaged by clause (bb) has to be limited  to  cases
where either the factual basis for invoking  the  ‘default’  clause  is  not
available or the period for completion of investigation  has  been  extended
under clause (bb) and the like. No other condition like the gravity  of  the
case, seriousness of the offence or  character  of  the  offender  etc.  can
weigh with the court at that stage  to  refuse  the  grant  of  bail  to  an
accused under  sub-section  (4)  of  Section  20  TADA  on  account  of  the
‘default’ of the prosecution.”

After the said decision was rendered, the interpretation of clause  (bb)  of
sub-section (4) of Section 20 of  TADA  was  referred  to  the  Constitution
Bench.  In Sanjay Dutt (supra) the two questions  that  were  posed  by  the
Constitution Bench are as follows: -

“(2)   The proper construction of clause (bb) of sub-section (4) of  Section
20 of the TADA Act indicating the nature  of  right  of  an  accused  to  be
released on bail  thereunder,  on  the  default  to  complete  investigation
within the time allowed therein; and

(3)   The proper construction and ambit of sub-section (8) of Section 20  of
the TADA Act indicating the scope for bail thereunder.”

A contention was raised before the Constitution  Bench  that  the  two-Judge
Bench decision in Hitendra Vishnu Thakur (supra)  read  in  the  context  of
final order made therein raised some ambiguity about the meaning and  effect
of Section 20(4)(bb) of the TADA Act.  Adverting to  the  interpretation  of
the said provision and scanning  the  anatomy,  the  larger  Bench  observed
thus: -
“43. Section 20 of the TADA Act prescribes the modified application  of  the
Code of Criminal Procedure indicated therein. The effect of sub-section  (4)
of Section 20 is to apply Section 167 of the Code of Criminal  Procedure  in
relation to a case involving  an  offence  punishable  under  the  TADA  Act
subject to the modifications indicated therein.  One  of  the  modifications
made [pic]in Section 167 of the Code by Section 20(4) of the TADA Act is  to
require the investigation in any offence under the TADA Act to be  completed
within a period of 180 days with the further  proviso  that  the  Designated
Court is empowered to extend that period up to one year if it  is  satisfied
that it is not possible  to  complete  the  investigation  within  the  said
period of 180 days, on the report of the public  prosecutor  indicating  the
progress of the investigation and the specific reasons for the detention  of
the accused beyond the said period of 180  days.  This  gives  rise  to  the
right of the accused to be released on bail on expiry of the said period  of
180 days or the extended period on default  to  complete  the  investigation
within the time allowed.”

Thereafter, the Court referred to Hitendra Vishnu Thakur (supra) wherein  it
has been held that the Designated Court would have “no jurisdiction to  deny
to an accused his indefeasible right to be released on bail  on  account  of
the default of the prosecution to file the  challan  within  the  prescribed
time if an accused seeks and  is  prepared  to  furnish  the  bail  bond  as
directed by the court”; and that a ‘notice’ to the accused  is  required  to
be given by the Designated Court before it grants any  extension  under  the
further  proviso  beyond  the   prescribed   period   for   completing   the
investigation.  It is apt to state that learned counsel for  the  petitioner
therein conceded the legal position that the right of the accused  which  is
enforceable only upto the filing of the challan and  does  not  survive  for
enforcement on the challan being filed in the court  against  him.   It  was
further contended that the decision in Hitendra Vishnu Thakur (supra)  could
not be read to confer on the accused an indefeasible right  to  be  released
on bail under Section 20(4)(bb) once the  challan  has  been  filed  if  the
accused continues in custody.  Such a concession was given by  stating  that
Section 167 CrPC has relevance only to the  period  of  investigation.   The
said position of law  was  accepted  by  the  learned  Additional  Solicitor
General.  However, it was contended by him that direction for grant of  bail
in Hitendra Vishnu Thakur (supra) was not in consonance  with  such  reading
of the decision and indicates that the indefeasible right of the accused  to
be released on bail on  expiry  of  the  time  allowed  for  completing  the
investigation survives and is enforceable even after the  challan  has  been
filed, without reference to the merits of the case or the material  produced
in the  court  with  the  challan.   Mr.  Dey  has  drawn  inspiration  from
paragraphs 48 and  49  of  the  said  decision  which  we  think  should  be
reproduced: -
“48. We have no doubt that the common stance before  us  of  the  nature  of
indefeasible right of the accused to  be  released  on  bail  by  virtue  of
Section 20(4)(bb) is based on a correct reading of the  principle  indicated
in that decision. The indefeasible right accruing to the accused in  such  a
situation is enforceable only prior to the filing  of  the  challan  and  it
does not survive or remain  enforceable  on  the  challan  being  filed,  if
already not availed of. Once the challan has been  filed,  the  question  of
grant of bail has to be considered and decided only with  reference  to  the
merits of the case under the provisions relating to  grant  of  bail  to  an
accused after the filing of the challan. The custody of  the  accused  after
the challan has been filed is not governed  by  Section  167  but  different
provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure. If that right had  accrued  to
the accused but it remained unenforced till the filing of the challan,  then
there is no question of its enforcement thereafter since it is  extinguished
the moment challan is filed because Section 167 CrPC ceases  to  apply.  The
Division Bench also indicated that if there be such an  application  of  the
accused for release on bail and also a  prayer  for  extension  of  time  to
complete the investigation according to the proviso  in  Section  20(4)(bb),
both of them should be considered together. It is obvious that no  bail  can
be given even in such a case unless the prayer for extension of  the  period
is rejected. In short, the grant  of  bail  in  such  a  situation  is  also
subject to refusal of the prayer for extension of time, if such a prayer  is
made. If the accused applies for bail under this provision on expiry of  the
period of 180 days or the extended period, as the case may be, then  he  has
to be released on bail forthwith. The accused, so released on  bail  may  be
arrested and committed to custody according to the provisions  of  the  Code
of Criminal Procedure. It is settled by Constitution Bench decisions that  a
petition seeking the writ of habeas corpus on the ground  of  absence  of  a
valid order of remand or detention of the accused, has to be  dismissed,  if
on the date of return of the rule, the custody or detention is on the  basis
of a valid order. (See Naranjan Singh Nathawan v. State  of  Punjab[9];  Ram
Narayan Singh v. State of  Delhi[10]  and  A.K.  Gopalan  v.  Government  of
India[11].)

49. This is the nature and  extent  of  the  right  of  the  accused  to  be
released on bail under Section 20(4)(bb) of the TADA Act read  with  Section
167 CrPC in such a situation. We clarify the decision of the Division  Bench
in [pic]Hitendra Vishnu Thakur, accordingly, and if  it  gives  a  different
indication because of the final order made therein, we regret our  inability
to subscribe to that view.”

                                                         [Emphasis supplied]

      After laying down the principles, the Constitution Bench recorded  its
conclusions of which conclusions (2)(a) and (2)(b), being relevant  for  the
present purpose, are reproduced below: -

 “(2)(a) Section 20(4)(bb) of the TADA Act only requires production  of  the
accused before the court in accordance with Section 167(1) of  the  Code  of
Criminal Procedure and this is how the requirement of notice to the  accused
before granting extension beyond  the  prescribed  period  of  180  days  in
accordance with the further proviso to clause (bb)  of  sub-section  (4)  of
Section 20 of the TADA Act has to be  understood  in  the  judgment  of  the
Division Bench of this Court in Hitendra Vishnu Thakur. The  requirement  of
such notice to the accused before granting the extension for completing  the
investigation is  not  a  written  notice  to  the  accused  giving  reasons
therein. Production of the accused at that time in the court  informing  him
that  the  question  of  extension  of  the  period   for   completing   the
investigation is being considered, is alone sufficient for the purpose.

(2)(b) The “indefeasible right” of the accused to be  released  on  bail  in
accordance with Section 20(4)(bb) of the TADA Act read with  Section  167(2)
of  the  Code  of  Criminal  Procedure  in  default  of  completion  of  the
investigation and filing of the challan within the time allowed, as held  in
Hitendra Vishnu Thakur is a right which ensures to, and  is  enforceable  by
the accused only from the time of default till the  filing  of  the  challan
and it does not survive or remain enforceable on the  challan  being  filed.
If the accused applies for bail  under  this  provision  on  expiry  of  the
period of 180 days or the extended period, as the case may be, then  he  has
to be released on bail forthwith. The accused, so released on  bail  may  be
arrested and committed to custody according to the provisions  of  the  Code
of Criminal Procedure. The right of the  accused  to  be  released  on  bail
after filing of the  challan,  notwithstanding  the  default  in  filing  it
within the time allowed, is governed from the time of filing of the  challan
only by the provisions relating to the grant  of  bail  applicable  at  that
stage.”

                                                            [Emphasis added]

Thus, the decision in Hitendra Narain Thakur (supra) has been  explained  by
the Constitution Bench and it has laid down  the  principles  pertaining  to
grant of bail on default.

In Dr. Bipin  Shantilal  Panchal  (supra)  the  Court  was  dealing  with  a
controversy whereby the High Court had rejected the prayer for bail  to  the
appellant who was an accused for  offences  under  the  Narcotic  Drugs  and
Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985.   A  contention  was  advanced  that  the
statutory period prescribed under the proviso  (a)  to  sub-section  (2)  of
Section 167 CrPC providing for  completion  of  investigation,  had  expired
and, therefore, the accused-appellant therein should have been  released  on
bail.  The three-Judge Bench referred to the decision in Union of  India  v.
Thamisharasi[12], reproduced a passage from Sanjay Dutt (supra) and came  to
hold as follows: -
“… if an accused person fails to exercise his right to be released  on  bail
for the failure of the prosecution  to  file  the  charge-sheet  within  the
maximum time allowed by law, he cannot contend that he had  an  indefeasible
right to exercise it at any  time  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  in  the
meantime the charge-sheet is filed. But on the other hand  if  he  exercises
the right within the time allowed by law and is released on bail under  such
circumstances, he cannot be rearrested on the mere  filing  of  the  charge-
sheet, as pointed out in Aslam Babalal Desai v. State of Maharashtra[13].

                                                            [Emphasis added]

In Rustam and others (supra) the  two-Judge  Bench  was  addressing  to  the
controversy where the High Court had entertained  the  bail  petition  after
the challan was filed.  After stating that the controversy had been  covered
by the decision in  Sanjay  Dutt  (supra)  wherein  Hitendra  Vishnu  Thakur
(supra) had been explained, the Court proceeded to state as follows: -

“The court  is  required  to  examine  the  availability  of  the  right  of
compulsive bail on the date it is considering the question of bail  and  not
barely on the date of the presentation of the petition for bail.”

After so stating the Court proceeded to  state  that  when  the  High  Court
entertained the  petition  for  bail  and  granted  it  to  the  respondents
therein, undeniably the challan stood filed in  the  court  and,  therefore,
the indefeasible right for getting bail was not available.

In Mohammed Iqbal Madar Sheikh and others v. State of Maharshtra[14],  while
interpreting the proviso (a) to sub-section (2) of Section 167 CrPC  in  the
context of TADA, the three-Judge Bench opined thus: -
“It need not be pointed out or  impressed  that  in  view  of  a  series  of
judgments of this Court, this right cannot be defeated by any court, if  the
accused  concerned  is  prepared  and  does  furnish  bail  bonds   to   the
satisfaction of the court concerned. Any  accused  released  on  bail  under
proviso (a) to Section 167(2) of the Code  read  with  Section  20(4)(b)  or
Section 20(4)(bb), because of the default on the part of  the  investigating
agency to conclude the investigation, within the period prescribed, in  view
of proviso (a) to Section 167(2) itself, shall be deemed  to  have  been  so
released under the provisions of Chapter XXXIII of the Code.  It  cannot  be
held that an accused charged of any offence, including offences under  TADA,
if  released  on  bail  because  of  the  default  in  completion   of   the
[pic]investigation, then no sooner the  charge-sheet  is  filed,  the  order
granting bail to such accused is to be cancelled. The bail of  such  accused
who  has  been  released,  because  of  the  default  on  the  part  of  the
investigating officer to complete the investigation, can be  cancelled,  but
not only on the  ground  that  after  the  release,  charge-sheet  has  been
submitted against such accused for an offence  under  TADA.  For  cancelling
the bail, the well-settled principles in respect  of  cancellation  of  bail
have to be made out.”

Be it noted, in the  said  case,  the  accused-appellants  were  taken  into
custody on 16.1.1993  and  the  charge-sheet  was  submitted  on  30.8.1993,
obviously beyond the  statutory  period  provided  under  Section  20(4)(b).
However, the Court proceeded to opine thus: -
“But it is an admitted position that no application for  bail  on  the  said
ground was made on behalf of the appellants. Unless  applications  had  been
made on behalf of the appellants, there  was  no  question  of  their  being
released on ground of default in completion of the investigation within  the
statutory period. It is now settled that  this  right  cannot  be  exercised
after the charge-sheet has been submitted and  cognizance  has  been  taken,
because in that event the remand of the accused concerned including one  who
is alleged to have committed an offence under TADA,  is  not  under  Section
167(2) but under other provisions of the Code. This  has  been  specifically
considered by a Constitution Bench of this Court in the case of Sanjay  Dutt
v. State through CBI(II).”

      After so stating the learned Judges reproduced a passage  from  Sanjay
Dutt (supra) and opined that it was not open to  the  accused-appellants  to
claim bail under proviso (a) to Section 167(2) CrPC inasmuch as the  charge-
sheet had been submitted against them the benefit of default  would  not  be
available.  Though the three-Judge Bench rejected the  prayer  for  bail  on
facts, yet considering the submissions put forth at  the  Bar,  observed  as
follows: -
“During hearing of the appeal, it was pointed out by the  counsel  appearing
on behalf of the appellants that some courts in order to  defeat  the  right
of the accused to be released on bail under proviso (a)  to  Section  167(2)
after expiry of the statutory period for completion  of  the  investigation,
keep the applications for  bail  pending  for  some  days  so  that  in  the
meantime, charge-sheets are submitted. Any such  act  on  the  part  of  any
court cannot be approved. If an accused charged with  any  kind  of  offence
becomes entitled to be  released  on  bail  under  proviso  (a)  to  Section
167(2),  that  statutory  right  should  not  be  defeated  by  keeping  the
applications pending till the charge-sheets are submitted so that the  right
which had accrued is extinguished and defeated.”

                                                         [Emphasis supplied]


In Uday Mohanlal Acharya  (supra)  the  majority,  after  referring  to  the
Constitution Bench decision in Sanjay Dutt’s case, posed the question  about
the true meaning of the expression of the following lines:-

“the indefeasible right accruing to the  accused  in  such  a  situation  is
enforceable only prior to the filing of the challan and it does not  survive
or remain enforceable on the challan being filed,  if  already  not  availed
or”


Answering the said question the court observed thus:-
“Does it mean that an accused files an application for bail and  offers  his
willingness for being released on bail or does it mean  that  a  bail  order
must be passed, the accused must furnish the bail and get  him  released  on
bail? In our considered opinion it would be  more  in  consonance  with  the
legislative mandate to hold that an accused must be held to have availed  of
his indefeasible right,  the  moment  he  files  an  application  for  being
[pic]released on bail and offers to abide by the  terms  and  conditions  of
bail. To interpret the  expression  “availed  of”  to  mean  actually  being
released on bail after furnishing the necessary bail  required  would  cause
great injustice to the accused and would defeat  the  very  purpose  of  the
proviso to Section 167(2) of the Criminal Procedure Code and  further  would
make an illegal custody to be legal, inasmuch as after  the  expiry  of  the
stipulated period the Magistrate had no further jurisdiction to  remand  and
such custody of the accused is without  any  valid  order  of  remand.  That
apart, when an accused files an application for bail  indicating  his  right
to be released as no challan had been filed  within  the  specified  period,
there is no discretion left in the Magistrate  and  the  only  thing  he  is
required to find out is whether the specified period under the  statute  has
elapsed or not, and whether  a  challan  has  been  filed  or  not.  If  the
expression “availed of”  is  interpreted  to  mean  that  the  accused  must
factually be released on bail, then in a given  case  where  the  Magistrate
illegally refuses to  pass  an  order  notwithstanding  the  maximum  period
stipulated in Section 167 had expired, and yet no  challan  had  been  filed
then the accused could only move to the higher forum and  while  the  matter
remains pending in the higher forum for consideration,  if  the  prosecution
files a charge-sheet then also the so-called right accruing to  the  accused
because of inaction on the  part  of  the  investigating  agency  would  get
frustrated. Since the legislature has given its  mandate  it  would  be  the
bounden duty of the court to enforce the same and it would  not  be  in  the
interest of justice to negate the same by interpreting  the  expression  “if
not availed of” in a  manner  which  is  capable  of  being  abused  by  the
prosecution. A two-Judge Bench decision of this Court in State  of  M.P.  v.
Rustam setting aside the order of grant of bail  by  the  High  Court  on  a
conclusion that on the  date  of  the  order  the  prosecution  had  already
submitted a police report and, therefore, the right stood  extinguished,  in
our considered opinion, does not express the correct position in law of  the
expression “if already not availed of”, used by the  Constitution  Bench  in
Sanjay Dutt.”
                                                         [Emphasis supplied]

After so stating the court referred to Makhan Singh Tarsikka   v.  State  of
Punjab[15],  Ram  Narayan  Singh  (supra)  and  A.K.  Gopalan  (supra)   and
proceeded to state as follows:-

“In interpreting the expression “if not availed of” in the manner  in  which
we have just interpreted we are conscious of the fact that  accused  persons
in several serious cases would get themselves released on bail, but that  is
what the law permits, and  that  is  what  the  legislature  wanted  and  an
indefeasible right to an accused  flowing  from  any  legislative  provision
ought not to be defeated by a court by giving a strained  interpretation  of
the provisions of the  Act.  In  the  aforesaid  premises,  we  are  of  the
considered opinion that an accused must be  held  to  have  availed  of  his
right flowing from the legislative mandate engrafted in the proviso to  sub-
section (2) of Section 167 of the Code if he has filed an application  after
the expiry of the stipulated period alleging that no challan has been  filed
and he is prepared to offer the bail that is ordered, and it is found  as  a
fact that no challan has been filed within the period  prescribed  from  the
date of the arrest of the accused. In our view,  such  interpretation  would
subserve the purpose and the object for which the provision in question  was
brought on to the statute-book. In such  a  case,  therefore,  even  if  the
application for consideration of an order  of  being  released  on  bail  is
posted before  the  court  after  some  length  of  time,  or  even  if  the
Magistrate refuses the application erroneously and  the  accused  moves  the
higher forum for getting a  formal  order  of  being  released  on  bail  in
enforcement of his indefeasible right, then filing of challan at that  stage
will not take away the right of the accused.”

                                                       [Underlining is ours]

Thereafter the Court culled out six conclusions which are necessitous to  be
reproduced.  They are: -
“1. Under sub-section (2) of  Section  167,  a  Magistrate  before  whom  an
accused is produced while the police is investigating into the  offence  can
authorise detention of the accused in such custody as the Magistrate  thinks
fit for a term not exceeding 15 days on the whole.

2. Under the proviso to the aforesaid sub-section (2) of  Section  167,  the
Magistrate may authorise detention of the  accused  otherwise  than  in  the
custody of police for a  total  period  not  exceeding  90  days  where  the
investigation relates to offence punishable  with  death,  imprisonment  for
life or imprisonment for a term of not less  than  10  years,  and  60  days
where the investigation relates to any other offence.

3. On the expiry of the said period of 90 days or 60 days, as the  case  may
be, an indefeasible right  accrues  in  favour  of  the  accused  for  being
released on bail on account of default by the investigating  agency  in  the
completion of  the  investigation  within  the  period  prescribed  and  the
accused is entitled to be released  on  bail,  if  he  is  prepared  to  and
furnishes the bail as directed by the Magistrate.

4. When an application for bail is filed by an accused  for  enforcement  of
his indefeasible right alleged  to  have  been  accrued  in  his  favour  on
account of default on the part of the investigating agency in completion  of
the investigation within the specified  period,  the  Magistrate/court  must
dispose of it forthwith, on being satisfied that in  fact  the  accused  has
been in custody for the period of 90 days or 60 days, as  specified  and  no
charge-sheet has been filed by the investigating agency. Such prompt  action
on the part of the Magistrate/court  will  not  enable  the  prosecution  to
frustrate the object of the Act and the legislative mandate  of  an  accused
being released on bail on  account  of  the  default  on  the  part  of  the
investigating agency in  completing  the  investigation  within  the  period
stipulated.

5. If the accused  is  unable  to  furnish  the  bail  as  directed  by  the
Magistrate, then on a conjoint reading of Explanation I and the  proviso  to
sub-section (2) of Section 167, the continued custody of  the  accused  even
beyond the specified period in  para  (a)  will  not  be  unauthorised,  and
therefore, if during that period  the  investigation  is  complete  and  the
charge-sheet is filed then the so-called indefeasible right of  the  accused
would stand extinguished.

[pic]6. The expression “if not already availed of” used  by  this  Court  in
Sanjay Dutt case3 must be understood to  mean  when  the  accused  files  an
application and is prepared to  offer  bail  on  being  directed.  In  other
words, on expiry of the period specified in para (a) of the proviso to  sub-
section (2) of Section 167 if the accused files an application for bail  and
offers also to furnish the bail on being directed, then it has  to  be  held
that the accused has availed of  his  indefeasible  right  even  though  the
court has not considered the said application  and  has  not  indicated  the
terms and conditions of bail, and the accused has not furnished the same.”

Elaborating further, the Court  held  that  if  the  charge-sheet  is  filed
subsequent to the availing of the indefeasible right  by  the  accused  then
that right would not stand frustrated or extinguished and, therefore, if  an
accused is entitled to be released on bail by application of the proviso  to
sub-section (2) of Section  167  CrPC,  makes  the  application  before  the
Magistrate, but the Magistrate erroneously refuses the same and rejects  the
application and then the accused  moves  the  higher  forum  and  while  the
matter remains pending before the higher forum for consideration  a  charge-
sheet is filed, the so-called indefeasible right of the  accused  would  not
stand extinguished thereby, and on the other hand, the  accused  has  to  be
released on bail.  The Court further proceeded to say that such an  accused,
thus is entitled to be released on bail in enforcement of  his  indefeasible
right will, however, have to be produced before the Magistrate on a  charge-
sheet being filed in accordance with Section 209  and  the  Magistrate  must
deal with him in the matter of remand to custody subject to  the  provisions
of the Code relating to bail and subject to the provisions  of  cancellation
of bail, already granted in accordance with the law laid down by  the  Court
in the case of Mohd. Iqbal (supra).

Before we proceed to deal with the subsequent  decisions,  we  should  pause
here to deliberate.  In Mohamed Iqbal  Madar  Sheikh  (supra)  it  has  been
expressed with anguish that the Court should not keep an  application  filed
under Section 167(2) after expiry of the statutory period pending to  enable
the investigation to file the charge-sheet to defeat the indefeasible  right
of an accused.  It has been clearly stated therein that the statutory  right
should not be defeated by keeping the application pending so that the  right
which had accrued is extinguished.   The  aforesaid  decision  was  rendered
after pronouncement by the Constitution Bench in Sanjay Dutt’s case and,  in
fact, it has been referred to therein.

In Uday Mohanlal Acharya (supra) the principle has been  further  elaborated
to hightlight the ratio laid down  in  Sanjay  Dutt’s  case.   It  has  been
clearly laid down that if a case is adjourned by the court granting time  to
the prosecution not adverting to the application  filed  on  behalf  of  the
accused, it would be a violation of the legislative mandate.  The  principle
stated in Uday Mohanlal Acharya (supra) is a binding precedent on  us.   Mr.
Dey, learned counsel appearing for the appellant, made  a  feeble  endeavour
that it is a two-Judge Bench decision and it runs contrary to the  principle
stated in Sanjay Dutt’s  case  and  hence,  it  should  be  treated  as  per
incuriam.  Both the facets of the submission are absolutely fallacious.   It
is a judgment rendered by a three-Judge Bench and not by a  two-Judge  Bench
simply because there is a dissenting opinion.  Secondly,  the  judgment  has
not been rendered in ignorance of a binding precedent but, on the  contrary,
it  has  directly  dealt  with  the  decision  in   Sanjay   Dutt   (supra),
appreciated, understood and  analysed  the  principles  stated  therein  and
culled out the conclusions and, therefore, by no stretch of  imagination  it
can be held to be per incuriam.  Even if a two-Judge Bench or a  three-Judge
Bench disagrees with the view expressed in Uday  Mohanlal  Acharya  (supra),
it has to be referred to a  larger  Bench.   As  we  notice,  prior  to  the
decision in Uday Mohanlal Acharya’s case  a  three-Judge  Bench  in  Mohamed
Iqbal Madar Sheikh (supra) had stated the principle in a different way.   We
are disposed to think, that is the principle which  the  Constitution  Bench
in Sanjay Dutt’s case has laid down.  When the  charge-sheet  is  not  filed
and the right has ripened earning the status of indefeasibility,  it  cannot
be frustrated by the prosecution on some pretext or the other.  The  accused
can avail his liberty only by filing application stating that the  statutory
period for filing of the challan has expired, the  same  has  not  yet  been
filed and an indefeasible right has accrued in his favour and further he  is
prepared to furnish the bail bond.  Once such an application  is  filed,  it
is obligatory on the part of the court to verify from the  records  as  well
as from the public prosecutor whether the time has expired and  the  charge-
sheet has been filed or not or whether an application  for  extension  which
is  statutorily  permissible,  has  been  filed.   If  an  application   for
extension is filed, it is to be dealt with as has been stated  in  the  case
of Sanjay Dutt (supra).  That is  the  duty  of  the  Court.   This  is  the
position of law as has been stated in Uday Mohanlal Acharya (supra).

In Ateef Nasir Mulla v. State of Maharashtra[16], the accused  was  arrested
on 15.4.2003 and the period of ninety days for completing the  investigation
was to expire on 13.7.2003.  On  11.7.2003  an  application  was  moved  for
extension of time to complete the investigation under  Section  49(2)(b)  of
Prevention of Terrorism Act, 2002.  The Special  Judge,  after  hearing  the
counsel for the accused, allowed the application  and  extended  the  period
for completing  the  investigation  till  14.8.2003  and,  accordingly,  the
accused was remanded to  custody.   The  order  of  granting  extension  was
challenged before the High Court.  On  14.7.2003,  after  expiry  of  ninety
days, an application for release of  accused  was  filed  stating  that  the
period of ninety days had expired and hence, he  was  entitled  to  bail  in
terms of Section 49(2)(b) read with the provisions of Section  167(2)  CrPC.
The charge-sheet was filed by the investigating agency on  19.7.2003  before
expiration of the extended time.  The learned  Special  Judge  rejected  the
application for grant of bail by order dated 25.7.2003  which  was  affirmed
by the High Court.  Noting various contentions advanced  at  the  Bar,  this
Court held thus:-

“17. It was then contended on behalf of the  appellant  that  the  appellant
having acquired an indefeasible right to be released on bail on  the  expiry
of 90 days from the date of his arrest, the Special Judge was not  justified
in rejecting the application for grant of bail  which  was  filed  on  14-7-
2003. By then the charge-sheet had not been submitted  by  the  police  and,
hence, there was no reason to continue the detention of the appellant.

18. This submission overlooks the fact that by an order dated 11-7-2003  the
Court had granted extension of time to the investigating agency to  complete
the investigation. Thus on 14-7-2003  when  an  application  was  filed  for
grant of bail under Section  167(2)  of  the  Code  of  Criminal  Procedure,
[pic]there was already an order extending the time  for  completion  of  the
investigation, and consequently  the  Court  was  empowered  to  remand  the
accused to judicial or police custody during the said extended period.”

The purpose of citing the aforesaid decision  is  that  an  application  for
grant of extension was filed prior to the expiry  of  ninety  days  and  the
same was granted and,  therefore,  the  indefeasible  right  vested  in  the
accused stood extinguished.

Presently, we shall refer to  certain  later  decisions.   In  the  case  of
Dinesh Dalmia (supra), which has been placed reliance upon by Mr.  Dey,  the
CBI lodged the First Information Report  against  the  appellant  and  three
companies on a complaint made  by  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Board  of
India.  As the appellant was away,  the  learned  Magistrate,  by  an  order
dated 14.2.2005, issued a non-bailable warrant of arrest  against  him.   In
the meantime, after the  completion  of  investigation  a  charge-sheet  was
submitted before the learned Magistrate  in  terms  of  sub-section  (2)  of
Section 173 CrPC.  The name of the appellant featured  in  the  charge-sheet
along with the companies.   Eventually,  after  following  the  process  the
appellant was sent to police  custody  on  14.2.2006  till  24.2.2006.   The
accused was handed over to the  police  for  conducting  investigation  till
8.3.2006.  He, however, was remanded to judicial custody till  14.3.2006  by
order dated 9.3.2006 on the plea that  further  investigation  was  pending.
CBI prayed for and obtained orders of remand to judicial  custody  from  the
learned Magistrate on 14.3.2006, 28.3.2006, 10.4.2006  and  28.4.2006.   The
appellant, on expiry of sixty days from the date of  his  arrest,  filed  an
application for statutory bail purported to  be  in  terms  of  the  proviso
appended to sub-section (2) of Section 167  CrPC  on  the  premise  that  no
further charge-sheet in respect of the investigation under  sub-section  (8)
of Section 173 CrPC had been filed.  When the said application  was  pending
consideration, CBI sought for his remand into judicial  custody  under  sub-
section (2) of Section 309 thereof.  The application for statutory bail  was
rejected by the learned Magistrate basically on the ground that the  accused
was arrested on the basis of non-bailable warrant issued by the court  after
taking cognizance of the offences in the  charge-sheet.   In  revision,  the
learned Sessions Judge allowed the revision placing  reliance  on  State  v.
Dawood Ibrahim Kaskar[17].  The CBI moved the High  Court  which  overturned
the decision of the learned Sessions Judge.  This Court  took  note  of  the
fact that the charge-sheet was submitted on  24.10.2005  and  the  applicant
was arrested only on 12.2.2006.   To  the  contentions  raised  before  this
Court, namely, (i) the charge-sheet filed  against  the  appellant  and  the
cognizance taken thereupon was illegal and invalid and  by  reason  thereof,
the valuable right of the appellant to be released on bail  had  been  taken
away; and (ii) even  if  the  charge-sheet  was  legal,  the  right  of  the
appellant under sub-section (2) of Section  167  CrPC  continued  to  remain
available  in  the  facts  and  circumstances  of  the  case.   Noting   the
contentions, the Court adverted to the power  conferred  under  the  statute
under Section 173 CrPC and, eventually, opined as follows: -

“24.  Concededly,  the  investigating  agency  is   required   to   complete
investigation within a reasonable time. The ideal period therefor  would  be
24 hours, but, in some cases, it may not be practically possible to  do  so.
Parliament, therefore, thought it fit that remand  of  the  accused  can  be
sought for in the event investigation is  not  completed  within  60  or  90
days, as the case  may  be.  But,  if  the  same  is  not  done  within  the
stipulated period, the same would not be detrimental  to  the  accused  and,
thus, he, on the expiry  thereof  would  be  entitled  to  apply  for  bail,
subject to fulfilling the conditions prescribed therefor.

25. Such a right of bail although is a valuable right  but  the  same  is  a
conditional  one;  the   condition   precedent   being   pendency   of   the
investigation. Whether an investigation in fact  has  remained  pending  and
the investigating officer has submitted the charge-sheet only  with  a  view
to curtail the right of the accused  would  essentially  be  a  question  of
fact. Such a question strictly does not arise  in  this  case  inasmuch  as,
according  to  CBI,  sufficient  materials   are   already   available   for
prosecution of the appellant. According to it, further  investigation  would
be inter alia necessary on certain vital points including  end  use  of  the
funds.

            xxx        xxx        xxx

27. It is also not a case of the appellant that  he  had  been  arrested  in
course of further investigation.  A  warrant  of  arrest  had  already  been
issued against him. The learned Magistrate was conscious of  the  said  fact
while taking cognizance of the offence.”


       Thereafter,  the  Court  proceeded  to  the  concept  of  remand   as
contemplated under the Code.  We may profitably quote the same: -

“38. It is a well-settled principle of interpretation of statute that it  is
to be read in its entirety. Construction of a statute should be  made  in  a
manner so as to give effect to all the  provisions  thereof.  Remand  of  an
accused is contemplated by Parliament  at  two  stages;  pre-cognizance  and
post-cognizance. Even in the same case, depending upon the nature of charge-
sheet filed by the investigating officer in terms  of  Section  173  of  the
Code, a cognizance may be taken  as  against  the  person  against  whom  an
offence is said to have been made out and against whom no such  offence  has
been made out even when investigation is pending. So long a charge-sheet  is
not filed within the meaning of sub-section (2) of Section 173 of the  Code,
investigation  remains  pending.  It,  however,   does   not   preclude   an
investigating  officer,  as  noticed  hereinbefore,  to  carry  on   further
investigation despite filing of a police report,  in  terms  of  sub-section
(8) of Section 173 of the Code.

39. The statutory scheme does not lead to  a  conclusion  in  regard  to  an
investigation leading to filing of  final  form  under  sub-section  (2)  of
Section 173 and further investigation  contemplated  under  sub-section  (8)
thereof. Whereas only when a charge-sheet is not filed and investigation  is
kept pending, benefit of proviso appended to sub-section (2) of Section  167
of the Code would be available to an  offender;  once,  however,  a  charge-
sheet is filed, the said right ceases. Such a right  does  not  revive  only
because a further investigation remains pending within the meaning  of  sub-
section (8) of Section 173 of the Code.”


As the aforesaid decision has been assiduously relied upon  by  Mr.  Dey  to
pyramid his  submission  of  statutory  interpretation,  the  right  of  the
accused and concept of remand, we have dealt with the same in  detail.   The
ultimate conclusion, as we perceive, is that once a  charge-sheet  is  filed
the benefit of proviso appended to  sub-section  (2)  of  Section  167  CrPC
ceases and it does not  revive  solely  because  the  further  investigation
remains pending.  In the said case the Court declined to  interfere  as  the
benefit was denied  to  the  accused  as  the  charge-sheet  was  filed  and
cognizance had been taken on which basis a non-bailable  warrant  of  arrest
was issued.  Thus, the said decision does not render any assistance  to  the
learned counsel for the appellant.

In Union of India v. Hassan Ali Khan and  another[18],  a  two-Judge  Bench,
while adverting to the submission of the learned counsel for  the  Union  of
India pertaining to the three-Judge Bench decision in Uday Mohanlal  Acharya
(supra), has understood the said decision in the following manner: -
25. Reference was also made to the decision of a three-Judge Bench  of  this
Court in Uday Mohanlal Acharya v. State of Maharashtra wherein the scope  of
Section 167(2) CrPC and the proviso thereto fell for  consideration  and  it
was the majority view that an  accused  had  an  indefeasible  right  to  be
released on  bail  when  the  investigation  is  not  completed  within  the
specified period and that for availing of such right the  accused  was  only
required to file an application before the  Magistrate  seeking  release  on
bail alleging that no challan had been filed within  the  period  prescribed
and if he was prepared to offer bail on being directed  by  the  Magistrate,
the Magistrate was under an obligation to dispose of  the  said  application
and even if in the meantime a charge-sheet had  been  filed,  the  right  to
statutory bail would not be affected. It was,  however,  clarified  that  if
despite the direction to furnish bail, the accused  failed  to  do  so,  his
right to be released on bail would stand extinguished.”


From the aforesaid analysis,  it  is  graphically  clear  that  the  learned
Judges laid emphasis how an accused avails the benefit  of  compulsive  bail
and what is the obligation cast on the Magistrate in law.

We may presently refer to a  recent  three-Judge  Bench  decision  in  Sayed
Mohd. Ahmad Kazmi v. State (Government of NCT of Delhi) and others[19].   In
the said case, the accused had filed an application for  grant  of  bail  on
2.6.2012 since his ninety days’ period of custody was to expire on  3.6.2012
and further  custody  was  sought  for  by  the  prosecution.   The  learned
Magistrate,  by  his  order  dated  2.6.2012,   extended   the   period   of
investigation and the custody of the appellant by another ninety days.   The
said order was assailed by the  appellant  in  a  revision  which  came  for
consideration  before  the  learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge,  who,   on
8.6.2012, held that it was  only  the  Sessions  Court  and  not  the  Chief
Metropolitan Magistrate which had the  competence  to  extend  the  judicial
custody  of  the  accused  and  to  entertain  cases  of  such  nature.   On
22.6.2012, the accused-appellant  was  produced  before  the  learned  Chief
Judicial  Magistrate  for  extension  of  his  custody.   On  17.7.2012   an
application was filed under Section 167(2) CrPC seeking default bail  as  no
charge-sheet had been filed within ninety days  period  of  the  appellant’s
custody.  The said application was  dismissed  by  the  learned  Magistrate.
Thereafter, the matter  was  referred  by  the  learned  Chief  Metropolitan
Magistrate to the learned District and Sessions  Judge,  who  directed  that
judicial custody of the accused-appellant be extended.  The aforesaid  order
of the learned Sessions Judge was  assailed  before  the  High  Court  under
Section 482 CrPC and the High  Court  stayed  the  operation  of  the  order
passed by  the  learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge  dated  28.6.2012  and,
therefore, the application for grant of statutory bail could  not  be  taken
up by the learned Additional Sessions Judge till the High Court vacated  the
order of stay on 13.7.2012.  As has been stated earlier, the  accused  moved
an application for grant of bail under  Section  167(4)  and  the  same  was
listed for consideration on 17.7.2012.  In the meantime,  revision  petition
came before the learned Additional  and  Sessions  Judge,  who  allowed  the
application and opined that the custody of  the  accused  was  illegal.   In
view of the order passed by the learned Additional Sessions Judge  declaring
the custody of the accused to be illegal, on the  same  day  an  application
under Section 167(2) CrPC was filed before the  learned  Chief  Metropolitan
Magistrate, but he, instead of hearing the  application  on  the  sad  date,
notified the hearing for 18.7.2012.  On the adjourned date, i.e.,  18.7.2012
the  State  filed  a  fresh  application  seeking   further   extension   of
appellant’s  custody  and  the  investigation  period.   The  learned  Chief
Metropolitan Magistrate directed a  copy  of  the  said  application  to  be
served on the counsel for the accused and notified the  matter  for  hearing
on 20.7.2012.  On that day he took up the matter for  extension  of  custody
and,  instead  of  considering  the  application,  extended  the   time   of
interrogation  and  custody  of  the  appellant   for   ninety   days   with
retrospective effect from 2.6.2012.   The  aforesaid  order  was  challenged
before the learned Sessions Judge who adjourned  the  matter  to  12.10.2012
and on 31.7.2013 the prosecution filed the charge-sheet.   When  the  matter
travelled to this Court,  a  question  arose  with  regard  to  getting  the
benefit of the default bail.  Be it stated, the Court  was  considering  the
provisions contained in Section 43-D  of  Unlawful  Activities  (Prevention)
Act, 1967 and Section 167(2) CrPC.  In that context, it observed thus: -
“18. By virtue of the aforesaid modification to the  provisions  of  Section
167(2)  CrPC,  the  period  of  90  days  stipulated   for   completion   of
investigation and filing of charge-sheet  was  modified  by  virtue  of  the
amended proviso, which indicated that if  the  investigation  could  not  be
completed within 90 days and if the court was satisfied with the  report  of
the Public Prosecutor indicating the progress of the investigation  and  the
specific reasons for detention of the accused beyond the period of 90  days,
extend the said period up to 180 days. In other words,  the  custody  of  an
accused  could  be  directed  initially  for  a  period  of  90  days   and,
thereafter, for a further period of 90 days, in all a  total  of  180  days,
for the purpose of filing charge-sheet. In the event  the  charge-sheet  was
not filed even within the extended [pic]period of 180 days,  the  conditions
directing that the accused person  shall  be  released  on  bail  if  he  is
prepared to do and does furnish bail, would become operative.”

Thereafter, the three-Judge Bench referred to the decision  in  Sanjay  Dutt
(supra), Uday Mohanlal Acharya (supra) and Bipin Shantilal  Panchal  (supra)
and taking note of the fact situation held that: -
“Not only is the retrospectivity of the  order  of  the  Chief  Metropolitan
Magistrate untenable, it could not also defeat  the  statutory  right  which
had accrued to the appellant on the expiry of 90 days  from  the  date  when
the appellant was taken into custody. Such  right,  as  has  been  commented
upon by this Court in Sanjay Dutt and the other cases cited by  the  learned
Additional   Solicitor   General,   could   only   be   distinguished   (sic
extinguished) once the charge-sheet had  been  filed  in  the  case  and  no
application has been made prior thereto for grant of statutory bail.  It  is
well-established that if an accused does not exercise his right to grant  of
statutory bail before the charge-sheet is filed, he loses his right to  such
benefit once such charge-sheet is filed and can, thereafter, only apply  for
regular bail.”


      Thereafter, the Court opined thus: -
“26. The circumstances in this case, however,  are  different  in  that  the
appellant had exercised his right to statutory bail on the very same day  on
which his custody was held to be illegal and such an  application  was  left
undecided by the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate till  after  the  application
filed by the prosecution for extension of  time  to  complete  investigation
was taken up and orders were passed thereupon.”


Thus, the aforesaid decision, as  we  find,  has  placed  reliance  on  Uday
Mohanlal Acharya’s case and, therefore, the principle  with  regard  to  the
time and manner of availability of the proviso appended to  sub-section  (2)
of Section 167 CrPC has been further crystallized.

Learned  counsel  for  the  appellant  has  commended   us,   with   immense
perseverance, the authority in Pragyna Singh Thakur (supra).   In  the  said
cae a contention was  raised  that  judgment  rendered  by  the  High  Court
declining to enlarge the accused on bail was violative  of  the  mandate  of
Articles 22(1) and 22(2) of the  Constitution  and  also  violative  of  the
statutory provisions engrafted under  Section  167(2)  CrPC.   In  the  said
case, the accused was  under  detention  from  10.10.2008  and  ninety  days
expired on 9.1.2009 and  the  charge-sheet  was  filed  on  20.1.2009.   The
accused-appellant filed an application under Section 167(2) CrPC  read  with
Section 21(4) of Maharashtra Control of Organized  Crime  Act,  1999  (MOCA)
and also under Section 439 CrPC.  The said application was resisted  by  the
prosecution on the ground that  the  charge-sheet  was  filed  on  20.1.2009
which was the eighty-ninth day from the date  of  his  remand  order,  i.e.,
24.10.2008.  The learned Special Judge rejected the application  vide  order
dated 9.7.2009.  The High Court being moved, dismissed the application  vide
order dated 12.3.2010.  Before this  Court  a  question  arose  whether  the
appellant was in police custody from 10.10.2008 to 22.10.2008, for the  High
Court had returned a finding that the accused was  arrested  on  23.10.2008.
This Court, on a scrutiny of the facts, held that the accused  was  arrested
on 23.10.2008 and, accordingly, came to hold thus: -

“49. As far as Section 167(2) of the Criminal Procedure  Code  is  concerned
this Court is of the firm opinion that no case for grant of  bail  has  been
made out under the said provision  as  charge-sheet  was  filed  before  the
expiry of 90 days from the date of first remand.  In  any  event,  right  in
this regard of default bail is lost once the  charge-sheet  is  filed.  This
Court  finds  that  there  is  no  violation  of  Article   22(2)   of   the
Constitution, because on being arrested on  23-10-2008,  the  appellant  was
produced before the Chief  Judicial  Magistrate,  Nasik  on  24-10-2008  and
subsequent detention in custody is pursuant to the order of  remand  by  the
Court, which orders are not [pic]being challenged, apart from the fact  that
Article 22(2) is not available against a court i.e.  detention  pursuant  to
an order passed by the court.

            xxx              xxx             xxx

51. Though this Court has come to the conclusion that the appellant has  not
been able to establish that she was arrested on 10-10-2008, even  if  it  is
assumed for the sake of argument that the appellant was arrested  on  10-10-
2008 as claimed by her and not on 23-10-2008 as stated by  the  prosecution,
she is not entitled to grant of default bail because this Court  finds  that
the charge-sheet was filed within 90 days from the date of  first  order  of
remand. In other words, the relevant date of counting  90  days  for  filing
the charge-sheet is the date of first order of the remand and not  the  date
of  arrest.  This  proposition  has  been   clearly   stated   in   Chaganti
Satyanarayana v. State of A.P.[20]”


To arrive at the said conclusion,  reliance  was  also  placed  on  Chaganti
Satyanarayana (supra),  CBI  v.  Anupan  J.  Kulkarni[21],  State  v.  Mohd.
Ashraft Bhat[22], State of Maharashtra v.  Bharati  Chandmal  Varma[23]  and
Rustam (supra).

After so stating, the Court addressed  to  the  entitlement  of  bail  under
Section 167(2) CrPC and, in that context, stated thus: -
“54. There is yet another aspect of the  matter.  The  right  under  Section
167(2) CrPC to be released on bail on default if charge-sheet is  not  filed
within 90 days from  the  date  of  first  remand  is  not  an  absolute  or
indefeasible right. The said right would be lost if  charge-sheet  is  filed
and would not survive after the filing of the charge-sheet. In other  words,
even if an application for bail is filed on  the  ground  that  charge-sheet
was not filed within 90 days, but before the consideration of the  same  and
before being released on bail, if charge-sheet is filed, the said  right  to
be released on bail would be lost. After the filing of the charge-sheet,  if
the accused is to be released on bail, it can be only  on  merits.  This  is
quite evident from the Constitution Bench decision of this Court  in  Sanjay
Dutt (2) v. State [paras 48 and 53(2)(b)]. The reasoning is to be  found  in
paras 33 to 49.”

                                                       [Underlining is ours]

Be it noted, to say so, the learned Judges drew support from  the  decisions
in Rustam (supra), Bipin Shantilal Panchal (supra),  Dinesh  Dalmia  (supra)
and Mustaq Ahmed Mohammed Isak (supra).  Thereafter they  adverted  to  Uday
Mohanlal Acharya’s case in following terms: -
“56. In Uday Mohanlal Acharya v. State of Maharashtra  a  three-Judge  Bench
of this Court considered the meaning  of  the  expression  “if  already  not
availed of” used by this Court in the decision rendered in  Sanjay  Dutt  in
para 48 and held that if an application for bail is filed before the charge-
sheet is filed, the accused could be said  to  have  availed  of  his  right
under Section 167(2) even though the  court  has  not  considered  the  said
application and granted him bail under Section 167(2) CrPC.  This  is  quite
evident if one refers to para 13 of the reported decision  as  well  as  the
conclusion of the Court at p. 747.

57. It is well settled that when an application for default bail  is  filed,
the merits of the matter are not to be gone  into.  This  is  quite  evident
from the principle laid down in Union  of  India  v.  Thamisharasi[24],  SCC
para 10, placita c-d.

58. From the discussion made above, it  is  quite  clear  that  even  if  an
application for bail is filed on the ground that charge-sheet was not  filed
within 90 days, before the  consideration  of  the  same  and  before  being
released on bail if charge-sheet is filed, the said right to be released  on
bail, can be only on merits. So far as  merits  are  concerned  the  learned
counsel for the appellant has not addressed this Court at all  and  in  fact
bail is not claimed on merits in the present appeal at all.”

                                                            [Emphasis added]

At this juncture, it is absolutely essential to delve  into  what  were  the
precise principles stated in Uday Mohanlal Acharya’s case and how  the  two-
Judge Bench has understood the same in Pragyna  Singh  Thakur  (supra).   We
have already  reproduced  the  paragraphs  in  extenso  from  Uday  Mohanlal
Acharya’s case  and  the  relevant  paragraphs  from  Pragyna  Singh  Thakur
(supra).  Pragyna Singh Thakur (supra) has drawn  support  from  Rustam  and
others case to buttress the principle  it  has  laid  down  though  in  Uday
Mohanlal Acharya’s case the said decision has been held not to  have  stated
the correct position of law and, therefore, the same  could  not  have  been
placed reliance upon.  The Division Bench in paragraph 56  which  have  been
reproduced hereinabove, as referred to paragraph 13 and the  conclusions  of
Uday Mohanlal Acharya’s case.  We have already quoted from paragraph 13  and
the conclusions.

The opinion expressed in  paragraph  54  and  58  in  Pragyna  Singh  Thakur
(supra) which we have underlined, as it seems to us,  runs  counter  to  the
principles stated in Uday Mohanlal Acharya (supra) which has  been  followed
in Hassan Ali Khan and another (supra) and  Sayed Mohd.  Ahmad  Kazmi.   The
decision in Sayed Mohd. Ahmad Kazmi’s case has been  rendered  by  a  three-
Judge Bench.  We may hasten to state, though in Pragyna Singh Thakur’s  case
the learned Judges have referred to Uday  Mohanlal  Acharya’s  case  but  as
stated the principle that even if an application for bail is  filed  on  the
ground that the charge-sheet was not filed within 90 days,  but  before  the
consideration of the same and before being  released  on  bail,  if  charge-
sheet is filed the said right to be enlarged on bail is lost.  This  opinion
is contrary to the earlier larger Bench decisions and also runs  counter  to
the subsequent three-Judge Bench decision in Mustaq  Ahmed  Mohammed  Isak’s
case.  We are disposed to think so, as the  two-Judge  Bench  has  used  the
words “before consideration of the same and before being released on  bail”,
the  said  principle  specifically  strikes  a  discordant  note  with   the
proposition stated in the decisions rendered by the larger Benches.

At this juncture, it will be appropriate to refer to the dissenting  opinion
by B.N. Agarwal, J. in Uday Mohanlal  Acharya’s  case.   The  learned  Judge
dissented with the majority as far as interpretation of the  expression  “if
not already availed of” by stating so:-

“29. My learned brother has referred  to  the  expression  “if  not  already
availed of” referred to in the judgment in Sanjay Dutt case for arriving  at
Conclusion 6. According to me, the expression “availed  of”  does  not  mean
mere filing of application for bail expressing therein  willingness  of  the
accused to furnish the bail bond. What will happen if on  the  61st  day  an
application for bail is filed for being released on bail on  the  ground  of
default by not filing the challan by the 60th day and on the  61st  day  the
challan is also filed by the time the Magistrate is  called  upon  to  apply
his mind to the challan as well as the petition for grant of bail?  In  view
of the several decisions referred to above and the  requirements  prescribed
by clause (a)(ii) of the proviso read with Explanation I to  Section  167(2)
of the Code, as no bail bond has been furnished,  such  an  application  for
bail has to be dismissed because the stage of proviso to Section  167(2)  is
over, as such right is extinguished the moment the challan is filed.

30. In this background, the expression  “availed  of”  does  not  mean  mere
filing of the application for  bail  expressing  thereunder  willingness  to
furnish bail bond, but the stage for actual furnishing  of  bail  bond  must
reach. If the challan is filed before that, then there  is  no  question  of
enforcing the right, howsoever valuable or indefeasible  it  may  be,  after
filing of the challan because thereafter  the  right  under  default  clause
cannot be exercised.”


On a careful reading of the aforesaid two paragraphs,  we  think,  the  two-
Judge Bench in Pragyna Singh Thakur’s case has somewhat in a similar  matter
stated the same.  As long as the majority view occupies the field  it  is  a
binding precedent.  That apart, it has been followed by a three-Judge  Bench
in Sayed Mohd. Ahmad Kazmi’s case.  Keeping in view the principle stated  in
Sayed Mohd.  Ahmad  Kazmi’s  case  which  has  based  on  three-Judge  Bench
decision in Uday Mohanlal Acharys’s case, we are  obliged  to  conclude  and
hold the principle laid down  in  Paragraph  54  and  58  of  Pragyna  Singh
Thakur’s case(which have been underlined by us) do  not  state  the  correct
principle of law.  It can clearly be stated that in view of  the  subsequent
decision of a larger Bench that cannot be treated to be  a  good  law.   Our
view finds support from the decision in Union of India and others v.  Arviva
Industries India Limited and others[25].

Coming to the facts of the instant case, we find that prior to the  date  of
expiry of 90 days which is the initial period for filing  the  charge-sheet,
the prosecution neither had filed the  charge-sheet  nor  had  it  filed  an
application for extension.  Had an application  for  extension  been  filed,
then the matter would  have  been  totally  different.   After  the  accused
respondent filed the application, the prosecution submitted  an  application
seeking extension of time for filing of the  charge-sheet.   Mr.  P.K.  Dey,
learned counsel for the appellant would submit that the same is  permissible
in view of the decision in Bipin Shantilal Panchal (supra) but on a  studied
scrutiny of the same we find the  said  decision  only  dealt  with  whether
extension could be sought from time to time till the  completion  of  period
as provided in the Statute i.e., 180 days. It  did  not  address  the  issue
what could be the effect of not filing an application  for  extension  prior
to expiry of the period because in the factual matrix it was  not  necessary
to do so.  In the instant case, the day the accused  filed  the  application
for benefit of the default provision as  engrafted  under  proviso  to  sub-
Section (2) of Section 167 CrPC the Court required the  accused  to  file  a
rejoinder affidavit by the  time  the  initial  period  provided  under  the
statute had expired.  There was  no  question  of  any  contest  as  if  the
application for extension had been filed prior to the expiry of  time.   The
adjournment by the learned Magistrate was misconceived.  He was  obliged  on
that day to deal with the application  filed  by  the  accused  as  required
under Section 167(2) CrPC.  We  have  no  hesitation  in  saying  that  such
procrastination frustrates the legislative mandate.  A Court cannot  act  to
extinguish the right of an accused if the law so confers on  him.   Law  has
to prevail.  The prosecution cannot avail such subterfuges to  frustrate  or
destroy the legal right of the accused.  Such an  act  is  not  permissible.
If  we  permit  ourselves  to  say  so,  the  prosecution  exhibited   sheer
negligence in not filing the  application  within  the  time  which  it  was
entitled to do so in law but made all adroit attempts to  redeem  the  cause
by its conduct.

In view of our aforesaid premised reasons we do not find any  error  in  the
order of  the  High  Court  in  overturning  the  order  refusing  bail  and
extending the benefit to the respondent and, accordingly, the  appeal  fails
and is hereby dismissed.

                                                             ……………………………….J.
                                                   [Dipak Misra]



                                                             ……………………………….J.
                                                          [N. V. Ramana]


New Delhi;
June 30, 2014.

I







-----------------------
[1]



       (1994) 4 SCC 602
[2]    (2001) 5 SCC 453
[3]    (1994) 5 SCC 410

[4]    1995 Supp (3) SCC 221
[5]    (1996) 1 SCC 718
[6]    (2007) 8 SCC 770
[7]    (2009) 7 SCC 480
[8]    (2011) 10 SCC 445
[9]    1952 SCR 395
[10]   1953 SCR 652
[11]   (1966) 2 SCR 427
[12]   (1995) 4 SCC 190
[13]   (1992) 4 SCC 272
[14]   (1996) 1 SCC 722
[15]   AIR 1952 SC 27

[16]   (2005) 7 SCC 29

[17]   (2000) 10 SCC 438

[18]   (2011) 10 SCC 235

[19]   (2012) 12 SCC 1

[20]   (1986) 3 SCC 141
[21]   (1992) 3 SCC 141
[22]   (1996) 1 SCC 432
[23]   (2002) 2 SCC 121
[24]   (1995) 4 SCC 190

[25]   (2014) 3 SCC 159




