

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Jafar Imam Naqvi vs Election Commission Of India on 15 May, 1948Author: D Misra
Bench: Dipak Misra, N.V. Ramana
                                 1

                                                          REPORTABLE


                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                     CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                   WRIT PETITION (C)No.429 OF 2014


JAFAR IMAM NAQVI                                    .......PETITIONER


                               VERSUS

ELECTION COMMISSION OF INDIA                         ......RESPONDENT


                       J U D G M E N T

DIPAK MISRA, J.


          The petitioner, a practising advocate of this Court, as

pro bone publico has preferred this writ petition with Article 32

of the Constitution with the following prayers:

          "a) Issue a writ of mandamus in public interest
          or any other appropriate writ, order, direction,
          commanding respondent to take stern action against
          everyone and anyone found guilty as per law in
          view of the ongoing activities of the accused
          politicians and political parties and to ensure
          protection of the security of Election Staff
          posted at Varanasi and of public at large of the
          entire country;

          b)   Issue a writ of mandamus in public interest
          or any other appropriate writ, order, direction
          commanding Respondent to withdraw the recognition
          given to such political parties resorting to
          illegal activities and to cancel the candidature
          of politicians found guilty before declaration the
          Election Results.

          c)   Pass such other order or orders as this
          Hon'ble Court may deem fit and proper in the facts
          and circumstances of the case."

2.        The basic assertions in the petition relate to speeches
                                            2

which have been delivered during the recently finished election

campaign by various leaders of certain political parties and how

they have the effect potentiality to affect the social harmony.                        It

is urged in the petition that these kind of hate speeches are

totally unwarranted and can endanger the safety and security of

public at large and undermine the structuralism of democratic body

polity.         Various examples have been given and certain newspaper

clippings       have been    annexed. In view of what we are going                     to

finally say, we are not inclined to advert to the same.

3.             The petitioner appearing in person has submitted                 that in

view     of    such   hate     speeches     by   political      leaders       when    the

equilibrium of the society is disturbed and there is a possibility

of creating a crack in the multi-faceted fabric of the society, it

is   the      constitutional    duty   of   this   Court   to    issue    a    writ    or

mandamus to the Election Commission of India to take appropriate

steps.         That   apart,    the    petitioner-in-person        has    also       made

submissions for issue of a mandamus to cancel the recognition of

such political parties and also to protect the liberty and safety

of the citizens.

4.             The seminal question that emanates for consideration is

whether the Court in exercise of power under Article 32 of the

Constitution should enter into the arena of effect and impact of

election speeches rendered during the election campaign in a public

interest litigation.           The petitioner commenced his arguments by

stating that since the infancy of the Constitution, this Court has

not declined to declare a law wherever it has found that it is
                                            3

unconstitutional.        In    that    regard,    he   has    commended     us   to    the

decision in The State of Bihar vs. Sir Kameshwar Singh1.                              On a

careful     reading     of    the   said   decision,     we   find   that   the   issue

decided therein has nothing to do with the case of the present

nature.

5.           Learned counsel has ambitiously submitted relying on the

judgment of this Court in Smt.Nilabati Behera alias Lalita Behera

vs. State of Orissa and others2 wherein the Court expanded the

concept     of   public       remedy   where     there   had    been   violation        of

fundamental rights and further opined that the concept of sovereign

immunity would be not applicable.                He has drawn our attention to

paragraph 19 of the said judgment which reads as under:

                  "We respectfully concur with the view that
             the court is not helpless and the wide powers
             given to this Court by Article 32, which itself is
             a fundamental right, imposes a constitutional
             obligation on this Court to forge such new tools,
             which may be necessary for doing complete justice
             and enforcing the fundamental rights guaranteed in
             the Constitution, which enable the award of
             monetary compensation in appropriate cases, where
             that is the only mode of redress available. The
             power available to this Court under Article 142 is
             also an enabling provision in this behalf The
             contrary view would not merely render the court
             powerless and the constitutional guarantee a
             mirage but may, in certain situations, be an
             incentive to extinguish life, if for the extreme
             contravention the court is powerless to grant any
             relief against the State, except by punishment of
             the wrongdoer for the resulting offence, and
             recovery of damages under private law, by the
             ordinary   process.   It    the   guarantee   that
             deprivation of life and personal liberty cannot be
             made except in accordance with law, is to be real,
             the enforcement of the right in case of every
             contravention must also be possible in the
             constitutional scheme, the mode of redress being

1    AIR 1952 SC 252
2    AIR 1993 SC 1960
                                        4

             that which is appropriate in the facts of each
             case. This remedy in public law has to be more
             readily available when invoked by the have not,
             who are not possessed of the wherewithal for
             enforcement of their rights in private law, even
             though its exercise is to be tempered by judicial
             restraint to avoid circumvention of private law
             remedies, where more appropriate."

6.           The facts of the said case are absolutely different since

it was stated in the said case that it is within the power of the

Court to formulate new tools which may be necessary for doing

complete     justice      and   for   enforcement   of   fundamental   rights

guaranteed     in   the    Constitution,     when   there   is   violation   of

fundamental rights enshrined under Article 21 of the Constitution.

Thus, the said decision has no applicability to the case in hand.

That apart, the issue related to grant of compensation.

7.           Learned counsel has also drawn our attention to Vishaka

and others vs. State of Rajasthan and others3 wherein the Court

taking note of the sexual harassment at workplace and keeping in

view the enforcement of the basic human rights or gender equality

guaranteed against sexual harassment and more particularly against

sexual harassment at work places issued guidelines and directed

that the said guidelines and norms should be strictly followed and

further observed that the same would be binding and enforceable in

law. The other decisions which have been cited by the learned

counsel are      Daryo and others vs. State of U.P. and others4, Union




3    AIR 1997 SC 3011

4    AIR 1961 SC 1457
                                            5

of    India   and    another     vs. Raghubir Singh (Dead) by Lrs. etc.,5

Kanusanyal     vs.      District   Magistrate,       Darjeeling    and   others6   and

M.C.Mehta and another Union of India & Ors. vs. AIR 1987 SC 1086.7

On a perusal of the aforesaid decisions, we find that they pertain

different      field     altogether.        Hence,    the    principle    stated   in

Vishaka's case and the principles laid down in other decisions are

really not attracted to the present case.

8.            Lastly, the learned counsel has brought to our notice a

recent three-Judge Bench decision of this Court in Pravasi Bhalai

Sangathan vs. Union of India and others8 which pertains to the

legal remedy because of hate speeches pertaining to inter state

migrants.      The Court adverted to various submissions advanced at

the Bar and took note of certain decisions of the Supreme Court of

Canada, dictionary meaning of `hate speeches' and the offences for

the    hate   speeches      in   Indian   Penal   Code,     the   Representation   of

People     Act,     1951,   Code   of     Criminal    Procedure,    1973,   Unlawful

Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967, Protection of Civil Rights Act,

1955, Religious Institutions (Prevention of Misuse) Act, 1980 and

thereafter Sections 124A, 153A, 153B, 295-A, 298, 505(1), 505(2) of

Indian Penal Code, 1860 and eventually held as follows:



              "21. While explaining the scope of Article 141 of
              the Constitution, in Nand Kishore v. State of
              Punjab, (1995) 6 SCC 614, this Court held as
              under:

5    AIR 1989 SC 1933

6    AIR 1973 SC 2684

7    AIR 1987 SC 1086
8   (2014) 3 Scale 552
                            6

         “Their Lordships decisions declare the
         existing law but do not enact any fresh
         law, is not in keeping with the plenary
         function of the Supreme Court under
         Article 141 of the Constitution, for the
         Court is not merely the interpreter of
         the law as existing, but much beyond
         that. The Court as a wing of the State
         is by itself a source of law. The law is
         what the Court says it is.”

     22. Be    that   as   it  may,   this   Court   has
     consistently clarified that the directions have
     been issued by the Court only when there has been
     a total vacuum in law, i.e. complete absence of
     active   law   to   provide  for    the   effective
     enforcement of a basic human right. In case there
     is inaction on the part of the executive for
     whatsoever reason, the court has stepped in, in
     exercise of its constitutional obligations to
     enforce the law. In case of vacuum of legal regime
     to deal with a particular situation the court may
     issue guidelines to provide absolution till such
     time as the legislature acts to perform its role
     by enacting proper legislation to cover the field.
     Thus, direction can be issued only in a situation
     where the will of the elected legislature has not
     yet been expressed.

     25. It is desirable to put reasonable prohibition
     on unwarranted actions but there may arise
     difficulty in confining the prohibition to some
     manageable standard and in doing so, it may
     encompass all sorts of speeches which needs to be
     avoided . For a long time the US courts were
     content in upholding legislations curtailing “hate
     speech” and related issues.    However, of lately,
     the courts have shifted gears thereby paving the
     way for myriad of rulings which side with
     individual freedom of speech and expression as
     opposed to the order of a manageable society.
     [See: Beauharnais v. Illinois, 343 U.S. 250
     (1952);   Brandenburg  v.   Ohio,   395  U.S.  444
     (1969); and R.A.V. v. City of St. Paul, 112 S. Ct.
     2538 (1992).

9.   Thereafter, the Court suggested as follows:
                                               7
                   "However, in view of the fact that the Law
             Commission has undertaken the study as to whether
             the Election Commission should be conferred the
             power    to    de-recognise    a   political    party
             disqualifying it or its members, if a party or its
             members     commit   the    offences   referred    to
             hereinabove, we request the Law Commission to also
             examine the issues raised herein thoroughly and
             also to consider, if it deems proper, defining the
             expression “hate speech” and make recommendations
             to the Parliament to strengthen the Election
             Commission to curb the menace of “hate speeches”
             irrespective of whenever made."

10.    The   petitioner      has       submitted     that   this        Court       being   the

guardian of the Constitution is obligated to issue notice, call for

the response and issue appropriate directions.                         Be it stated, the

Election     Commission     might       have   taken    note     of    it    and     initiated

certain action.       The matter of handling hate speeches could be a

matter of adjudication in an appropriate legal forum and may also

have    some   impact       in    an     election      disputes       raised        under    the

Representation of People Act, 1951.                     Therefore, to entertain a

petition as a public interest litigation and to give directions

would be inappropriate. We have said so in view of the judgments in

Manohar      Joshi    vs.        Nitin     Bhaurao      Patil         and        another9    and

Prof.Ramchandra G.Kapse vs. Haribansh Ramakbal Singh10.

11.          Before   parting       with    the     case,   it    may       be    stated    that

public interest litigation was initially used by this Court as a

tool to take care of certain situations which related to the poor

and under-privileged who were not in a position to have access to

the Court.      Thereafter, from time to time, the concept of public


9. (1996) 1 SCC 169

10.(1996) 1 SCC 206
                                        8

interest    litigation     expanded   with     the   change    of    time      and   the

horizon included the environment and ecology, the atrocities faced

by individuals in the hands of the authorities, financial scams and

various    other      categories   including    eligibility         of   the    people

holding high offices without qualification. But a public interest

litigation      pertaining    to    speeches     delivered      during         election

campaign, we are afraid, cannot be put on the pedestal of a real

public interest litigation.        There are laws to take care of it.                 In

the name of a constitutional safeguard entering into this kind of

arena,     in   our    convinced   opinion,      would   not    be       within      the

constitutional parameters.

12.   In the result, we are not persuaded, despite the adroit labour

and vehement arguments by the petitioner-in-person to issue notice

and accordingly, the writ petition, stands dismissed in limine.



                                               ...........................J.
                                               (DIPAK MISRA)



                                               ...........................J.
                                               (N.V. RAMANA)
NEW DELHI;
MAY 15, 2014.
                                     9
ITEM NO.2                   COURT NO.5           SECTION PIL


              S U P R E M E   C O U R T   O F    I N D I A
                           RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS
                    WRIT PETITION(C)NO.429 OF 2014


JAFAR IMAM NAQVI                                        PETITIONER(S)

                   VERSUS

ELECTION COMMISSION OF INDIA                            RESPONDENT(S)

(With appln.(s) for seeking permission to appear and argue the
petition by the petitioner-in-person)

Date: 15/05/2014    This Petition was called on for hearing today.

CORAM :
          HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE DIPAK MISRA
          HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE N.V. RAMANA

For Petitioner(s) Petitioner-in-person



For Respondent(s)


            UPON hearing counsel the Court made the following
                                O R D E R

            The writ petition, stands dismissed in limine in terms of

the signed judgment.


(Satish K.Yadav)                                  (Renuka Sadana)
  Court Master                                      Court Master
         (Signed reportable judgment is placed on the file)

