

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Smt. Kanwal Sood vs Nawal Kishore And Another on 26 November, 1982Equivalent citations: 1983 AIR  159, 1983 SCR  (1) 871
Author: R Misra
Bench: Misra, R.B. (J)
           PETITIONER:
SMT. KANWAL SOOD

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
NAWAL KISHORE AND ANOTHER

DATE OF JUDGMENT26/11/1982

BENCH:
MISRA, R.B. (J)
BENCH:
MISRA, R.B. (J)
DESAI, D.A.

CITATION:
 1983 AIR  159		  1983 SCR  (1) 871
 1983 SCC  (3)	25	  1982 SCALE  (2)1066


ACT:
     Criminal tresspass-Donor reserving life interest in the
house gifted  to the donee-Permitting another to reside with
him-Status of  that person  after the  death  of  the  donor
whether his  occupation would  amount to  Criminal trespass-
Penal Code Section 441 as amended by U.P. Act 31 of 1961.



HEADNOTE:
     Premises, "Aranaya	 Kutir" bearing	 Municipal  No.	 47A
Jakhan in  Dehradun was	 owned by  one Shri  R.C.  Sood.  He
executed a  gift deed  in favour of Shree Anand Mayee Sangh,
Dehradun, with	a stipulation that the donor shall remain in
possession of  the premises  during his	 life-time and after
his death his widow if alive would remain in possession. The
management of  the same would be taken up by the Sangh after
their death.
     In 1967,  the appellant,  the widow  of the  brother of
Shri R.C.  Sood was  invited by Shri Sood to reside with him
in the	aforesaid house and ever since she has been residing
peacefully there.  On 10th  of October,	 1973 Shri R.C. Sood
expired. Respondent  No. 1,  Shri Nawal Kishore as secretary
of the	Anand  Mayee  Saogh,  served  a	 notice	 dated	13th
November, 1973	on the	appellant asking  her to  vacate the
premises  immediately,	and  threatening  to  take  criminal
action against	her on failure to do so, as her further stay
in the	premises would	be deemed  to be  in the nature of a
criminal trespass.  When the  appellant did  not vacate	 the
premises, respondent  No. 1  filed a complaint under section
468  of	 the  Penal  Code.  The	 Sub-Divisional	 Magistrate,
Mussorie found	that the  continued stay  of  the  appellant
amounted to  criminal trespass within the meaning of section
441 of	the Penal  Code, convicted her under section 448 and
sentenced her to pay a fine of Rs. 100 or in lieu thereof to
undergo simple	imprisonment for  40 days.  In addition, the
learned	 Magistrate  also  passed  an  order  directing	 the
appellant to  vacate the  premises within  two months of the
order, purporting  to  be  one	under  section	456  o;	 the
Criminal Procedure Code.
     The appeal	 preferred by  the appellant was allowed and
the  conviction	  and  sentence	  passed  were	 set  aside.
Respondent No.	1, therefore assailed the order of acquittal
by filing  a criminal appeal before the High Court. The High
Court allowed  it and reversed the order of acquittal passed
by the	Sessions Judge	and convicted  the appellant. In the
opinion of the High Court, the appeal filed by the appellant
before the  Sessions Judge  was incompetent,  as  no  appeal
would lie  against the	imposition of  fine. The  High Court
declined to  treat the	appeal as  a division  in as much as
under the provisions of section 401(5) of the Criminal
872
Procedure Code,	 it is permissible to treat a revision as an
appeal but  not vice  versa. Hence  the	 appeal	 by  special
leave.
     Allowing the appeal, the Court
^
     HELD: 1.1.	 In  order  to	satisfy	 the  conditions  of
section 441  of the  Penal Code, it must be established that
the party,  complained of  entered in  possession  over	 the
premises with  intent to  commit an  offence. Every trespass
does not  amount to  criminal trespass within the meaning of
that section. [875 G]
     1:2.   Initiating	  criminal   proceedings    in	 the
circumstances of  this instant	case is only an abuse of the
process of  the court.	This is	 essentially a	civil matter
which could  be properly  adjudicated upon  by	a  competent
civil court.  (a) The  appellant was  allowed to  occupy tho
premises in  1967 by Mr. Sood perhaps on 'lease and license'
basis.	(b)  A	bare  perusal  of  the	complaint  filed  by
Respondent No.	1 makes	 it abundantly	clear that  there is
absolutely  no	 allegation  about   the  intention  of	 the
appellant to commit any offence, or to intimidate, insult or
annoy any  person in  possession; and  (c)  If	a  suit	 for
eviction is filed in the civil court, the appellant, who may
be fondly  thinking that  she had  a  right  to	 occupy	 the
premises even  after the  death of  Shri Sood, might be in a
position to  vindicate her right and justify her possession.
[875 E-H, 876 A, E-F]
     2.	 The  appeal  filed  by	 the  appellant	 before	 the
Sessions  Judge	 was  competent	 and  maintainable.  If	 the
learned Magistrate  had only  awarded a sentence of fine, in
that case  revision alone  would be  competent	and  not  an
appeal. But  in the  instant case,  the Magistrate  not only
awarded the  fine of Rs. 100 but also directed the appellant
to vacate  the premises	 within two  months from the date of
the order.  This part  of the  order presumably	 was  passed
under section  456 of Criminal Procedure Code, and this made
the order appealable.
						   [876 F-H]



JUDGMENT:
     CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 69
of 1981
     Appeal by	special leave  from the	 Judgment and  order
dated the 16th December, 1980 of the Allahabad High Court in
Criminal Appeal No. 342 of 1976.
     Soli J.  Sorabjee, R.K Jain, R.P. Singh and Natin Mohan
Popli for the Appellant.
     P.R. Mridul,  Praveen Kumar,  A.K. Sharma	and  Dalveer
Bhandari for the Respondent.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     MISRA  J.	The  present  appeal  by  special  leave  is
directed  against   the	 judgment   of	the  High  Court  of
Judicature at Allahabad,
873
dated 16th  December, 1980,  convicting the  appellant under
section 448 of the Indian Penal Code.
     Premises Aranya  Kutir bearing Municipal No. 47A Jakhan
in Dehra Dun was owned by one R.C. Sood. He executed a gift-
deed in favour of Shri Anand Mayee Sangh, Dehra Dun with the
stipulation that the donor shall remain in possession of the
premises during	 his life time and after his death his widow
if alive  would remain	in possession. The management of the
same would be taken up by the Sangh after their death.
     The appellant  is the  widow of the brother of Shri R.C
Sood. It  appears that	in 1967 the appellant was invited by
Shri R.C. Sood to reside with him in the aforesaid house and
ever since  she has  been residing peacefully there. On 10th
of October,  1973, Shri	 R.C. Sood  expired. The  appellant,
however, continued to live in the said house.
     Respondent No.  1, Shri  Nawal Kishore  as Secretary of
the aforesaid  Sangh served  a notice  dated 13th  November,
1973 on	 the appellant	asking her to vacate the premises in
dispute immediately,  failing which  a criminal action under
section 448  of the Indian Penal Code would be taken against
her as	her further  stay in the premises would be deemed to
be in  the nature  of a	 criminal trespass.  The  appellant,
however, did  not vacate  the premises	as she was convinced
that her  stay in  the said  premises could  not  amount  to
criminal trespass.
     Respondent No.  1, Shri Nawal Kishore thereupon filed a
complaint under section 448 of the Indian Penal Code against
the appellant  in the  Court of	 Sub-Divisional	 Magistrate,
Mussoorie. He  examined himself	 as P.W. 1 and also produced
Shri K. Bose as P.W.2.
     The appellant  in her  statement under  section 313, as
well as	 in her	 statement as  a witness D.W. 1 admitted the
services of  notice on	her but	 denied	 that  any  criminal
action was  called for.	 She further stated that she had met
Anand Mayee who had permitted her to live in the house.
     The learned  Magistrate, however,	took the  view t hat
the premises  in dispute  has been vested in the Anand Mayee
Sangh by
874
virtue of  the gift-deed  and a notice to vacate having been
served	upon  the  appellant,  the  continued  stay  of	 the
appellant in  the  said	 premises  amounted  to	 a  criminal
trespass within	 the meaning  of section  441 of  the Indian
Penal Code.  He accordingly  convicted the  appellant  under
section 448  to the  Indian Penal  Code and sentenced her to
pay 1  fine of	Rs. 100	 and in	 default to  undergo  simple
imprisonment  for   40	days.	In  addition,	the  learned
Magistrate also	 passed an  order directing the appellant to
vacate the  premises within two months of the passing of the
order, purporting  to  be  one	under  section	456  of	 the
Criminal Procedure Code.
     The appellant  feeling aggrieved  by the  order of	 the
learned Magistrate  went up  in appeal	and took  up various
grounds. The  learned Sessions Judge allowed the appeal, set
aside the  order of the learned Magistrate and acquitted the
appellant  by	his  judgment	Dated  19th   August,  1975.
Respondent No.	1 Shri	Nawal Kishore  assailed the order of
acquittal by  filing criminal  appeal in  the High Court and
the High  Court in  its turn allowed the appeal and reversed
the order  of acquittal passed by the learned Sessions Judge
and convicted  the appellant.  In the  opinion of  the	High
Court the  appeal filed by the appellant before the Sessions
Judge was  incompetent as  no appeal  could lie	 against the
imposition  of	fine.  It  also	 took  the  view  under	 the
provisions of  section 401(5) of the Criminal Procedure Code
it is  permissible to  treat a revision as an appeal but not
vice versa.  It therefore,  declined  to  treat	 the  appeal
against the  order of  Magistrate as  a revision.  The	High
Court further  expressed the  opinion that the appellant may
file a	revision if she so chooses which would be considered
by the Court of Admission and then It proper the same may be
allowed. The  appellant feeling aggrieved by the judgment of
the High Court bas filed the present appeal with the special
leave as stated earlier.
     Shri Soli	J. Sorabji  appearing for  the appellant has
contended that	on the	allegations made in the complaint no
offence under  section 411  of the Indian Penal Code is made
out. In	 order to  appreciate  the  contention	it  will  he
appropriate at	this stage to read section 441 of the Indian
Penal Code:
	  "441. Criminal  trespass :- Whoever enters into or
     upon property  in the possession of another with intent
     to commit	an offence or to intimidate, insult or annoy
     any person	 in possession	of such	 property, or having
     lawfully entered into or upon such property, unlawfully
     remains
875
     there with	 intent thereby to intimate, insult or annoy
     any such  person, or  with intent to commit an offence.
     is said to commit "criminal trespass".
There has  been local  amendment by  U.P. Act 31 of 1961 for
section 441  of the  Indian Penal Code, 1 960, the following
shall be substituted:
	  "441. Criminal  Trespass:- Whoever  enters into or
     upon property  in possession  of another with intent to
     commit an	offence or  to intimidiate,  insult or annoy
     any person	 in possession	of such property, or, having
     lawfully entered into or upon such property, unlawfully
     remains  there  with  intent  thereby  to	intimidiate,
     insult or	annoy any  such person,	 or with  intent  to
     commit an offences, or having entered into or upon such
     property, whether before or after the coming into force
     of the Criminal Law (U.P.Amendment) Act, 1961, with the
     intention of  taking unauthorised	possession or making
     unauthorised use  of such	property fails	to  withdraw
     from such	property, or  its  possession  or  use	when
     called upon  to do	 so by that another person by notice
     in writing, duly served upon him, by the date specified
     in the notice, is said to commit, 'criminal trespass'.
     It may be pointed out that the appellant was allowed to
occupy the  premises in	 1967 by  Shri R.C.  Sood. Under the
terms of  gift-deed Shri  Sood was  entitled  to  remain  in
occupation of the premises during his life time. He could as
well grant,  leave and	licence to p the appellant to occupy
the premises  along with  him. Now the question arises about
her status  after the  death of Shri R.C. Sood. At the most,
it can	be said	 that after the death of Shri Sood the leave
and license  granted by	 Shri Sood came to an end and if she
stayed in  the premises	 after the  death of  Shri Sood, her
possession may	be that	 of a  trespasser but every trespass
does not  amount to  criminal trespass within the meaning of
section 141  of the  Indian Penal  Code. In order to satisfy
the conditions	of section  441 it  must be established that
the appellant  entered in  possession over the premises with
intent to commit an offence. A bare persual of the complaint
filed by  Respondent No.  I makes  it abundantly  clear that
there is absolutely no allegation about the intention of the
appellant to  commit any offence or to intimidate, insult or
annoy
876
any person  in possession,  as will  be evident	 from  three
material paragraphs which are quoted below:
     "2.   That the  late Shri	R.C. Sood  was occupying the
	  said premises in accordance with clause No. I of a
	  gift-deed executed  by him in favour of Shri Anand
	  Mayee Sangh and after his demise the said premises
	  had to be delivered to Shri Anand Mayee Sangh.
     3.	   That	 after the  demise of  Shri R.".  Sood,	 the
	  accused was  repeatedly requested  to	 voluntarily
	  vacate and  deliver the  possession  of  the	said
	  premises to the Sangh but the accused paid no heed
	  and hence a notice dated 13.11.1973, copy of which
	  enclosed, was	 sent to  the accused as required by
	  U.P. Amendment  of Section  448  I.P.C.  the	said
	  notice was  served upon accused on 14.11.73 as per
	  postal A.D. receipt attached herewith.
     4.	   That	 the accused was required to quit and vacate
	  the said  premises by	 the 20th  day of  November,
	  1973 but  instead of	vacating  the  premises	 the
	  accused has  been making  unusual pretext  and has
	  thus	committed   an	offence	 under	section	 448
	  I.P.C."
     The appellant  may be  fondly thinking  that she  had a
right to  occupy the  premises even  after the death of Shri
R.C. Sood.  If a  suit for  eviction is filed in Civil Court
she might  be in  a position  to  vindicate  her  right	 and
justify her  possession. This  is essentially a civil matter
which could  be properly  adjudicated upon  by	a  competent
Civil  Court.	To  initiate  criminal	proceedings  in	 the
circumstances appears  to be only an abuse of the process of
the Court.
     We also  do not  agree with the view taken by the Court
that the  appeal filed	by the appellant before the Sessions
Judge was  incompetent. If  the learned	 Magistrate had only
awarded a  sentence of	fine, in  that case  revision  alone
would be competent and not an appeal but in the instant case
the Magistrate not only awarded the fine of Rs. 100 but also
directed the  appellant to  vacate the	premises within	 two
months from  the date  of the  order. This part of the order
presumably was	passed under  section 456  of  the  Criminal
Procedure Code,	 and this  made the order appealable and the
High Court  has gone  wrong in	holding that appeal filed by
the  appellant	 before	  the	Sessions   Judge   was	 not
maintainable.
877
     There were	 certain other pleas taken by the respondent
before the  High Court	but it	is not necessary to refer to
those pleas  in the  view that	we have	 taken that  on	 the
complaint itself  no offence under section 448 of the Indian
Penal Code is made out.
     For the  foregoing discussion, the appeal must succeed.
It is  accordingly allowed.  The judgment  of the High Court
dated 16th December, 1980 is set aside and that of the Court
of Sessions  is restored.  The bail  bond if  any  shall  be
cancelled.
S.R.					     Appeal allowed.
878




