

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
State Of Andhra Pradesh vs S.R. Rangadamappa on 1 October, 1982Equivalent citations: 1982 AIR 1492, 1983 SCR  (1) 496
Author: O C Reddy
Bench: Reddy, O. Chinnappa (J)
           PETITIONER:
STATE OF ANDHRA PRADESH

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
S.R. RANGADAMAPPA

DATE OF JUDGMENT01/10/1982

BENCH:
REDDY, O. CHINNAPPA (J)
BENCH:
REDDY, O. CHINNAPPA (J)
VENKATARAMIAH, E.S. (J)

CITATION:
 1982 AIR 1492		  1983 SCR  (1) 496
 1982 SCC  (3) 223	  1982 SCALE  (1)842


ACT:
     Interpretation-Satute  prescribed	minimum	 sentence-No
discretion given  to court-Court, if can reduce the sentence
to less than the minimum prescribed '



HEADNOTE:
     Where the	statute prescribes minimum sentence and does
not provide  for any  exceptions or  vest the Court with any
discretion to  award a sentence below the prescribed minimum
under any  special circumstances,  a Court cannot reduce the
sentence to less than the minimum permissible. [497 D-E]



JUDGMENT:
     CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Special Leave Petition
(Criminal) No. 432 of 1981.
     From the  Judgment and  order dated the 25th September,
1980 of	 the High  Court of  Andhra Pradesh  at Hyderabad in
Criminal Revision Case No. 461 of 1980.
     P. Ram Reddy and G.N. Rao for the Petitioner.
     The order of the Court was delivered by
     CHINNAPPA REDDY.  J. The respondent was charged with an
offence under  Section 34  (a) of  the Andhra Pradesh Excise
Act on	the allegation	that he was found in possession of a
quantity of  eight litres  of illicitly distilled arrack, an
intoxicant, in	contravention of  the provisions  of the Act
and the Rules made under the Act. The learned Judicial First
Class Magistrate convicted him and sentenced . him to suffer
rigorous imprisonment  for a  period of two years, which was
the minimum  sentence that  could be  awarded for an offence
under Section  34 (a)  of the  A.P. Excise Act. On an appeal
preferred by  the respondent,  the Sessions Judge, Anantapur
con firmed  the	 conviction  and  sentence.  The  respondent
preferred a  revision petition	before the  High Court.	 The
learned Single	Judge who  heard the  revision confirmed the
conviction. But, on the question of sentence, he observed:
497
	  "Mr. T.  Ramulu, appearing  for the petitioner who
     has A  filed this	revision through jail, has submitted
     that the  petitioner is  aged 30  years and  is a first
     offender and  he has already served a sentence of about
     IN months	and that  the sentence	may be appropriately
     modified. It  is true that under the A.P. Excise Act, a
     statutory minimum	sentence is  prescribed. But  having
     regard to	the  submissions  made	above,	I  feel	 the
     interest of  justice will	be satisfied if the sentence
     of	 imprisonment  imposed	against	 the  petitioner  is
     reduced to the period already undergone and if the fine
     of Rs.  5O/-, imposed  is set  aside. The	revision  is
     dismissed subject to the modification as stated above."
     We are  unable to understand why the High Court reduced
the sentence.  The statute prescribes a minimum sentence. It
does not  provide for  any exceptions  and does not vest the
Court with  any discretion  to award  a sentence  below	 the
prescribed minimum  under  any	special	 circumstances.	 The
learned judge  has himself noticed that the sentence imposed
is the	statutory minimum.  Having noticed  that the statute
prescribes a  minimum sentence	for the	 offence,  the	High
Court has ununderstably reduced the sentence of imprisonment
to less	 than the  minimum permissible.	 The High  Court was
clearly in  error in  doing so. We think we have said enough
to correct the error. It is unnecessary to pursue the matter
further by granting special leave. The petition is dismissed
with the above observations.
P.B.R.					 Petition dismissed.
498




