

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Biru Mahato vs District Magistrate, Dhanbad on 15 October, 1982Equivalent citations: 1982 AIR 1539, 1983 SCR  (1) 584
Author: D Desai
Bench: Desai, D.A.
           PETITIONER:
BIRU MAHATO

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
DISTRICT MAGISTRATE, DHANBAD.

DATE OF JUDGMENT15/10/1982

BENCH:
DESAI, D.A.
BENCH:
DESAI, D.A.
MISRA, R.B. (J)

CITATION:
 1982 AIR 1539		  1983 SCR  (1) 584
 1982 SCC  (3) 322	  1982 SCALE  (2)899
 CITATOR INFO :
 R	    1982 SC1548	 (5)


ACT:
     National Security	Act, 1980,  Section 3(2)  Scope	 of-
Preventive  detention	of  the	 detenu	 whose	liberty	 has
otherwise already  been prevented  by  keeping	in  jail  is
impermissible  under   the  N.S.  Act-Non-awareness  of	 the
detaining authority  about the	detenu's detention  in	jail
would vitiate  the order  of detention on the ground of non-
application  of	  mind-Affidavit  should   be  that  of	 the
detaining authority  who had  the subjective satisfaction of
the detention.



HEADNOTE:
     Detenu Biru  Mahato was arrested on January 13, 1982 on
the allegation	that he	 was involved in two incidents which
occurred, first	 at 5  p.m. and	 the second  at 5.30 p.m. on
January 12,  1982. In  the first  occurrence detenu  and his
associates were	 alleged to  have committed  offences  under
sections 341,  323 and	506 of Indian Penal Code, as per the
F.I.R. 25(1)/82	 at Bagmara  Police Station.  In the  second
case, F.I.R. 24(1)/82 registered at the same police station,
they were said to have committed offences under sections 307
and 323	 I.P.C. After  his arrest the detenu was confined in
prison. In  respect of the first occurrence bail application
was accepted,  but in  respect of  the second occurrence the
bail application  was rejected	by the	District  &  Session
Judge, Dhanbad	on February  5, 1982,  on the ground that in
exercise of  powers conferred  by sub  section (2) read with
sub section  (3) of  Section 3 of the National Security Act,
1980, the  detenu is  detained by  the order of the District
Magistrate so  as to  prevent him  from acting in any manner
prejudicial to	the maintenance of public order and the bail
application has	 become infructuous.  On February  10, 1982,
grounds of detention were served on the detenu in jail where
he was	already detained.  The grounds of detention referred
to the	two incidents  occurred on  January  12,  1982.	 The
detenu made  a representation on February 15, 1982 which was
rejected by  the State	Government on February 16, 1982. The
case of	 the detenu  was referred  to the Advisory Board and
after receipt  of its  report the State Government confirmed
the order of detention.
     Detenu preferred a petition for a writ of habeas corpus
in the	High Court at Patna which was dismissed in limine by
a Division  Bench of  the High	Court. Hence  the appeal  by
special leave and the writ petition.
     Allowing the appeal and the petition, the Court
^
     HELD:  1.1	 A  preventive	action	postulates  that  if
preventive step	 is  not  taken	 the  person  sought  to  be
prevented may  indulge into  an activity  prejudicial to the
maintenance of	public order.  In other	 words,	 unless	 the
activity is  interdicted by a preventive detention order the
activity which is being indulged
585
into is	 likely to  be repeated,  This is  the postulate  of
section 3 of the National Security Act. And this indubitably
transpires from	 the language  employed in  sub section	 (2)
which says  that the detention order can be made with a view
to preventing  the person [sought to be detained from acting
in any	manner prejudicial  to	the  maintenance  of  public
order. If,  it is  shown that the man sought to be prevented
by a  preventive order is already effectively prevented, the
power under  sub section  (2) of  Section 3,  if  exercised,
would imply  that one  who is already prevented is sought to
be further  prevented, which  is  not  the  mandate  of	 the
section, and would appear tautologous. [588 C-E]
     1.2. The  detaining  authority  before  exercising	 the
power of  preventive detention would take into consideration
the past  conduct or antecedent history of the person and as
a matter of fact it is largely from the prior events showing
the tendencies	or inclinations	 of a  man that an inference
could be  drawn whether	 he is	likely even in the future to
act in	a manner  prejudicial to  the maintenance  of public
order. If  the	subjective  satisfaction  of  the  detaining
authority leads	 to this conclusion it can put an end to the
activity by  making a preventive detention order. If the man
is already  detained a detaining authority cannot be said to
have  subjectively   satisfied	himself	 that  a  preventive
detention order need be made. [588 E-H]
     Ujagar Singh  v. State  of Punjab; Jagir Singh v. State
of Punjab,  [1952]  SCR	 756;  Rameshwar  Shaw	v.  District
Magistrate, Burdwan  and another, [1964] 4 SCR 921; referred
to.
     1.3.  The	subjective  satisfaction  of  the  detaining
authority must	comprehend the	very fact  that	 the  person
sought to  be detained is in jail or under detention and yet
a preventive  detention order  is a compelling necessity. If
the subjective	satisfaction is reached without awareness of
this very relevant fact, the detention order is likely to be
vitiated. But, it will depend on the facts and circumstances
of each case. [590 B-C]
     Vijay Kumar  v. State  of J & K and others, AIR 1982 SC
1023 applied.
     2.1. Conceding  that  in  a  given	 case  a  preventive
detention order is required to be made even against a person
who is	already in  jail or  under detention  and  that	 the
detaining  authority   shows  its   awareness  of  the	fact
situation and  yet passes the detention order, the detention
order must  show on  the  face	of  it	that  the  detaining
authority  was	 aware	of   the  situation.  Otherwise	 the
detention order would suffer from vice of non-application of
mind.
     [590 H, 591 A-B]
     2.2. The  awareness must be of the fact that the person
against whom  the detention  order is  being made is already
under detention	 or in jail in respect of some offence. This
would show  that such  a person	 is not	 a  free  person  to
indulge into  a prejudicial activity which is required to be
prevented by a deten-
586
tion order. And this awareness must find its place either in
the detention  order or	 in  the  affidavit  justifying	 the
detention order	 when challenged.  In the  absence of it, it
would appear that the detaining authority was not even aware
of this	 vital fact  and mechanically  proceeded to pass the
order which  would unmistakably	 indicate that	there was no
application of	mind to	 the relevant facts and any order of
such serious  consequence when	mechanically passed  without
application of	mind is	 liable to  be set aside as invalid.
[591 B-D]
     2.3. A  person may	 be holder  of	office	of  District
Magistrate. But	 when the  subjective satisfaction of holder
of office  who actually passed the detention order is put in
issue, the  mere  occupant  of	office	cannot	arrogate  to
substitute the	subjective satisfaction of the holder of the
post who actually passed the detention order. The subsequent
occupant can  speak from  the  record.	But  the  subsequent
holder of  office  has	made  an  affidavit  as	 if  he	 was
subsequently satisfied	a fact	in connection  with  record.
Here, the  affidavit of	 Mr. Brara  the subsequent holder of
office of  Distt. Magistrate  has to be ignored and one must
reach the  conclusion that  the averments made by the detenu
have remained un-controverted. [592 B-D]



JUDGMENT:
     ORIGINAL JURISDICTION  : Writ  -Petition (Criminal) No.
1125 of 1982.
     (Under article 32 of the Constitution of India)
			    WITH
	      Criminal Appeal No. 488 of 1982.
     (Appeal by	 special leave	from the  judgment and order
dated 7-4-1982	of the	Patna High  Court (Ranchi  Bench) in
Writ Jurisdiction Case No. 40 of 1982 (R).
     U.P. Singh for the Petitioner/Appellant.
     D. Goburdhan for the Respondent.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     DESAI, J. By our order dated October 8, 1982, the order
of detention  dated February  5, 1982,	made by the District
Magistrate, Dhanbad,  against detenu Biru Mahato was quashed
and set	 aside by  us further stating that the reasons would
follow. Here are the reasons.
     Detenu Biru Mahato was arrested on January 13, 1982, on
the allegation	that he	 was involved in two incidents which
occurred, first
587
at 5  p.m. and	the second at 5.30 p.m. on January 12, 1982.
In the	first occurrence detenu and his associates appear to
have committed offences under ss. 341, 323 and 506 read with
s. 34  of the  Indian Penal Code. F.I.R. led to registration
of the	offences  at  Bagmara  Police  Station	numbered  as
25(1)/82. F.I.R. No. 24(1)/82 has been registered at Bagmara
Police Station	for offences  under ss.	 307 and 323, I.P.C.
After his  arrest the  detenu was  confined  in	 prison.  In
respect of  the first  occurrence bail	application  of	 the
detenu was  accepted but in respect of the second occurrence
the bail  application was rejected by the learned District &
Sessions Judge,	 Dhanbad on  February 12,  1982. In the mean
time the  District Magistrate,	Dhanbad, made  an  order  on
February 5,  1982, in  exercise of  powers conferred by sub-
section (2)  read with	sub-section (3)	 of section 3 of the
National Security  Act, 1980  (`Act' for  short),  directing
that the detenu be detained so as to prevent him from acting
in any	manner prejudicial  to	the  maintenance  of  public
order. On  February 10,	 1982,	grounds	 of  detention	were
served on  the detenu in jail where he was already detained.
The grounds of detention referred to the two incidents which
occurred  on   January,	 12,   1982.  The   detenu  made   a
representation on  February 15,	 1982, which was rejected by
the State  Government on  February 16,	1982.  Case  of	 the
detenu was  referred to the Advisory Board and after receipt
of its	report the  State Government  confirmed the order of
detention.
     Detenu perferred a petition for a writ of habeas corpus
in the	High Court at Patna which was dismissed in limine by
a Division  Bench of  the High	Court. Detenu has filed this
writ petition  under Article  32 as  also appeal  by special
leave under  Art. 136. Both the appeal and writ petition are
being disposed of by this common judgment.
     Two contentions  were canvassed on behalf of the detenu
: (1)  the date on which the detention order came to be made
the detenu  was already	 deprived of  his liberty  as he was
arrested and  was confined  in jail  and, therefore,  he was
already prevented from pursuing any activity which may prove
prejudicial to	the maintenance	 of public  order, hence  no
order of  detention could  be made  against  him;  (ii)	 the
detaining authority  was not  even aware that the detenu was
already in  jail and the order suffers from the vice of non-
application of	mind. In  our opinion  both the	 grounds are
weighty
588
and go	to the	root of	 the matter  and would	vitiate	 the
detention order.
     Sub-section (2) of s. 3 of the Act confers power on the
Central Government  or the State Government to make an order
of detention  with a  view to  preventing  any	person	from
acting in  any manner  prejudicial to  the security  of	 the
State  from   acting  in   any	manner	prejudicial  to	 the
maintenance of public order, etc. In this case the detaining
authority has  made the	 order on being satisfied that it is
necessary to detain the detenu with a view to preventing him
from acting  in any manner prejudicial to the maintenance of
Public	order.	 A  preventive	action	postulates  that  if
preventive step	 is  not  taken	 the  person  sought  to  be
prevented may  indulge into  an activity  prejudicial to the
maintenance of	public order.  In other	 words,	 unless	 the
activity is  interdicted by a preventive detention order the
activity which	is being  indulged  into  is  likely  to  be
repeated. This	is the	postulate of  the section.  And this
indubitably transpires	from the language employed in sub-s.
(2) which  says that  the detention order can be made with a
view to	 preventing the	 person sought	to be  detained from
acting in  any manner  prejudicial  to	the  maintenance  of
public order.  Now, if it is shown that the man sought to be
prevented by  a	 preventive  order  is	already	 effectively
prevented, the power under sub-s. (2) of s. 3, if exercised,
would imply  that one  who is already prevented is sought to
be further  prevented  which  is  not  the  mandate  of	 the
section,  and	would  appear	tautologous.  An  order	 for
preventive detention  is made on the subjective satisfaction
of the	detaining authority.  The detaining authority before
exercising the power of preventive detention would take into
consideration the  past conduct or antecedent history of the
person and  as a matter of fact it is largely from the prior
events showing	the tendencies or inclinations of a man that
an inference could be drawn whether he is likely even in the
future to  act in a manner prejudicial to the maintenance of
public	order.	 If  the   subjective  satisfaction  of	 the
detaining authority  leads to  this conclusion it can put an
end to the activity by making, a preventive detention order.
(see Ujagar  Singh v.  State of	 Punjab, and  Jagir Singh v.
State of Punjab).(1) Now, if the man is already detained can
a detaining  authority be  said to  have  been	subjectively
satisfied that	a preventive  detention order  be made	? In
Rameshwar Shaw v. District Magistrate, Burdwan &
589
Anr.(1) this  Court held  that as an abstract proposition of
law the	 detention order  can be made in respect of a person
who is	already detained.  But having  said this,  the Court
proceeded to observe as under:
	  "As an  abstract proposition of law, there may not
     be any  doubt that	 s. 3  (1) (a) does not preclude the
     authority from  passing an order of detention against a
     person whilst  he is  in detention	 or in jail, but the
     relevant facts  in connection  with the  making of	 the
     order may	differ and that may make a difference in the
     application of the principle that a detention order can
     be passed	against a person in jail. Take for instance,
     a case  where a  person has  been sentenced to rigorous
     imprisonment for  ten years.  It  cannot  be  seriously
     suggested that  soon after the sentence of imprisonment
     is pronounced  on the  person, the	 detaining authority
     can make  an order	 directing the detention of the said
     person after he is released from jail at the end of the
     period of	the sentence imposed on him. In dealing with
     this question,  again the consideration of proximity of
     time will	not be	irrelevant. On	the other hand, if a
     person who is undergoing imprisonment, for a very short
     period, say  for a	 month or two or so, and it is known
     that he  would soon  be released  from jail,  it may be
     possible for  the authority  to consider the antecedent
     history of	 the said  person  and	decide	whether	 the
     detention of  the said  person would be necessary after
     he is  released from  jail and if the authority is bona
     fide satisfied that such detention is necessary, he can
     make a  valid order  of detention a few days before the
     person is likely to be released. The antecedent history
     and the  past conduct  on which  the order of detention
     would be  based would,  in such a case, be proximate in
     point of time and would have a rational connection with
     the  conclusion   drawn  by   the	authority  that	 the
     detention of the person after his release is necessary.
     It may not be easy to discover such rational connection
     between the  antecedent history  of the  person who has
     been sentenced  to ten  years rigorous imprisonment and
     the view  that his detention should be ordered after he
     is released  after running	 the whole  of his sentence.
     Therefore, we are satisfied that the question as
590
     to whether	 an order of detention can be passed against
     a person  who is  in detention  or in jail, will always
     have to  be determined  in the  circumstances  of	each
     case".
One can	 envisage a  hypothetical case	where  a  preventive
order may  have to be made against a person already confined
to jail or detained. But in such a situation as held by this
Court it  must be  present to  the  mind  of  the  detaining
authority that	keeping in  view the fact that the person is
already detained  a  preventive	 detention  order  is  still
necessary. The	subjective  satisfaction  of  the  detaining
authority must	comprehend the	very fact  that	 the  person
sought to  be detained is already in jail or under detention
and yet	 a  preventive	detention  order  is  a,  compelling
necessity. If the subjective satisfaction is reached without
the awareness of this very relevant fact the detention order
is likely  to be  vitiated. But	 as stated  by this Court it
will depend on the facts and circumstances of each case.
     The view herein finds further support from the decision
of this	 Court in Vijay Kumar v. State of J & K and Ors.,(1)
wherein this Court recently held as under :
	  "Preventive detention	 is resorted  to, to  thwart
     future action. If the detenu is already in jail charged
     with a  serious offence,  he is  thereby prevented from
     acting in	a manner  prejudicial to the security of the
     State. Maybe, in a given case there yet may be the need
     to order  preventive detention  of a  person already in
     jail. But	in such	 a situation the detaining authority
     must disclose  awareness of  the fact  that the  person
     against whom  an order of preventive detention is being
     made is  to the  knowledge of  the authority already in
     jail  and	yet  for  compelling  reasons  a  preventive
     detention order  needs to	be made. There is nothing to
     indicate the  awareness of the detaining authority that
     detenu was	 already in  jail and yet the impugned order
     is required  to be	 made. This, in our opinion, clearly
     exhibits non-application  of mind	and would  result in
     invalidation of the order."
     This leads	 us to	the second  limb of  the submission.
Conceding that	in a given case a preventive detention order
is required
591
to be  made even  against a person who is already in jail or
under detention	 and that  the detaining authority shows its
awareness of the fact situation and yet passes the detention
order, the  detention order must show on the face of it that
the  detaining	 authority  was	  aware	 of  the  situation.
Otherwise the detention order would suffer from vice of non-
application of	the mind.  The awareness must be of the fact
that the  person against  whom the  detention order is being
made is	 already under	detention or  in jail  in respect of
some offence.  This would  show that  such a person is not a
free person  to indulge into a prejudicial activity which is
required to  be prevented  by a	 detention order.  And	this
awareness must	find its place either in the detention order
or in  the affidavit  justifying the  detention	 order	when
challenged. In	the absence  of it, it would appear that the
detaining authority  was not  even aware  of this vital fact
and mechanically  proceeded to	pass the  order which  would
unmistakably indicate that there was non-application of mind
to  the	 relevant  facts  and  any  order  of  such  serious
consequence when  mechanically passed without application of
mind is liable to be set aside as invalid.
     Turning to	 the facts  of this case the detention order
refers to  Biru	 Mahato	 son  of  Mohan	 Mahato	 of  Village
Jamdiha, P.S.  Bagmara, Distt.	Dhanbad. There is not even a
whimper of  the detenu	being in jail for nearly three weeks
prior to the date on which the detention order was made.
     The detenu	 is referred  to as  one who is staying at a
certain place  and is  a free  person.	Assuming  that	this
inference from	the mere  description of  the detenu  in the
detention  order   is	impermissible	the   affidavit	  is
conspicuously silent  on this point. Not a word is said that
the detaining  authority was  aware of	the  fact  that	 the
detenu was  already in	jail and  yet it became a compelling
necessity  to  pass  the  detention  order.  Therefore,	 the
subjective satisfaction	 arrived at clearly discloses a non-
application of	mind to	 the relevant facts and the order is
vitiated.
     Mr. U.P.  Singh, learned  counsel for  the detenu urged
that this  Court should	 not  take  into  consideration	 the
affidavit  filed   by  Dr.  J.S.  Brara	 on  behalf  of	 the
respondent. Dr. J. S. Barara, describing himself as District
Magistrate, Dhanbad, has made the affidavit as if he was the
detaining authority.  When this	 statement was challenged on
behalf of the detenu, Mr. Goburdhan, learned
592
counsel for  the respondent  went to  the extreme  length of
asserting that	Mr. Brara  was the  detaining authority.  At
that stage  Mr. U.  P. Singh, learned counsel for the detenu
produced the  original order of detention signed by one Shri
D. Nand	 Kumar as District Magistrate. This was shown to Mr.
Goburdhan and  he was  unable to sustain his submission that
Mr. Brara  who has  filed the  affidavit was  the  detaining
authority. In  fact, at one stage we were inclined to take a
very serious  view of the conduct of Mr. Brara in making the
affidavit as  if he is the detaining authority. In para 1 he
has described  himself	as  District  Magistrate  being	 the
detaining authority of the petitioner which statement is not
borne out  by the  record. He may be the holder of office of
District Magistrate. But when the subjective satisfaction of
holder of office is put in issue the mere occupant of office
cannot arrogate	 to substitute	his subjective satisfaction.
He may	speak from the record but that is not the case here.
Therefore, the	affidavit of Mr. Brara has to be ignored and
one must  reach the conclusion that the averment made by the
detenu have remained uncontroverted.
     For these	reasons we  have quashed  and set  aside the
order of detention.
S.R.				Appeal and Petition allowed.
593




