

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Municipal Corporation Of Delhi vs Purshotam Dass Jhunjunwala And ... on 1 December, 1982Equivalent citations: 1983 AIR  158, 1983 SCR  (1) 895
Author: S M Fazalali
Bench: Fazalali, Syed Murtaza
           PETITIONER:
MUNICIPAL CORPORATION OF DELHI

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
PURSHOTAM DASS JHUNJUNWALA AND OTHERS

DATE OF JUDGMENT01/12/1982

BENCH:
FAZALALI, SYED MURTAZA
BENCH:
FAZALALI, SYED MURTAZA
VENKATARAMIAH, E.S. (J)

CITATION:
 1983 AIR  158		  1983 SCR  (1) 895
 1983 SCC  (1)	 9	  1982 SCALE  (2)1118
 CITATOR INFO :
 R	    1989 SC   1	 (6)
 R	    1990 SC 494	 (4)
 RF	    1991 SC1260	 (43)
 RF	    1992 SC 604	 (100)


ACT:
     Code of  Criminal Procedure,  1973-S. 482	-  Complaint
containing clear  allegations -	 High Court not justified in
quashing proceedings against accused.



HEADNOTE:
     The facts	of this case were almost identical with that
of Municipal  Corporation of Delhi v. Ram Kishan Rohtagi and
Ors.  (the  case  reported  immediately	 before	 this  one).
However Paragraph  5 of the complaint filed in this case was
in the following terms:
	  "That accused	 Ram Kishan  Bajal is  the Chairman,
     accused R.P.  Neyatiya is	the  Managing  Director	 and
     accused Nos. 7 to 12 are the Directors of the Hindustan
     Sugar Mills  Ltd. and  were incharge of and responsible
     to it  for the  conduct of	 its business at the time of
     commission of offence."
     Adopting a line of reasoning similar to the one adopted
by it  in the  earlier case,  the High Court had quashed the
proceeding against the accused (respondents here).
     After pointing out that the law on the subject had been
dealt with in the earlier case and allowing the appeal,
^
     HELD: In  this case  a clear  averment has been made in
Para 5	of the complaint regarding the active role played by
the respondents	 and the  extent of  their liability  and  a
prima facie  case for  summoning the  accused has  been made
out. It	 cannot therefore  be said  that Paragraph  5 of the
complaint is  vague and	 does not implicate the respondents.
As to  what would be the evidence against the respondents is
not a  matter to  be considered at this stage and would have
to be  proved at  the trial.  The High	Court went  wrong in
holding that  tho allegations  made Paragraph  5 were vague.
[891 B-D]



JUDGMENT:
     CRIMINAL APPELLATE	 JURISDICTION: Criminal	 Appeal	 No.
749 Of 1980.
     Appeal by	special leave  from the	 judgment and  order
dated the  5th March,  1980  of	 the  Delhi  High  Court  in
Criminal Misc. (Main) No. 501 of 1974.
     B.P. Maheshwari for the Appellant.
896
     V.S. Desai and Arvind Minocha for the Respondents.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     PAZAL ALI,	 J. This appeal by special leave is directed
against a judgment dated 5.3.1980 of the Delhi High Court by
which the  High Court  quashed the  proceedings taken by the
Municipal Corporation  of Delhi against respondent Nos. I to
11. This is a case where the facts are almost identical with
the facts  of Criminal	Appeal No. 701 of 1980 which we have
decided today,	with a vital difference which we shall point
out hereafter.
     In this  case also,  Shri M.M. Gupta, Food Inspector in
the Municipal  Corporation of  Delhi purchased	a sample  of
milk toffees  from shop	 of Jagdish Chander Mehta situate at
Lajpat	Nagar,	New  Delhi.  The  milk	toffees	 which	were
purchased by the food inspector were found to be adulterated
by the	Public	Analyst.  The  toffees	in  this  case	were
manufactured by	 Hindustan Sugar  Mills, Sl,  Mahatma Gandhi
Road, Bombay.  A complaint was filed before the Metropolitan
Magistrate against  accused Nos.  I  to	 12  under  sections
7116117	 of   the  Prevention	of  Food   Adulteration	 Act
mentioning the facts stated above.
     The High  Court was  of the view that the complaint did
not disclose  any offence  and adopting	 a similar  line  of
reasoning, as  in criminal  appeal No.	701 of 1980, quashed
the proceedings	 against respondent  Nos. I  to 11.  We have
already dealt with the law on the subject in our decision in
criminal appeal	 No. 701  of 1980, a copy of which is placed
on the	file of	 this case  The relevant allegations against
the accused-respondents	 are to	 be found  in para  S of the
complaint which may be extracted thus:
	  "5, That accused Ram Kishan Bajaj is the Chairman,
     accused R.P.  Neyatia  is	the  Managing  Director	 and
     accused Nos. 7 to 12 are the Directors of the Hindustan
     Sugar Mills  Ltd. and  were incharge of and responsible
     to it  for the  con duct of its business at the time of
     commission of offence."
     Unlike the	 other case, para S of the complaint of this
case gives  complete details  of  the  role  played  by	 the
respondents and the extent of their liability. It is clearly
mentioned that	Ram Kishan  Bajaj is  the Chairman  and R.P.
Neyatia is the Managing Director and respondents 7 to 11 are
the Directors of the Mill and were incharge of
897
and responsible	 for the conduct of its business at the time
of the	commission of  the offence whereas in the other case
the complaint  has merely  drawn a  presumption without	 any
averment.
     In the  instant case,  a clear  averment has  been made
regarding the  active role played by the respondents and the
extent of  their 1 liability. In this view of the matter, it
cannot be  said that  para 5  of the  complaint is vague and
does not  implicate respondents I to 11. As to what would be
the evidence  against the  respondents is not a matter to be
considered at  this stage and would have to be proved at the
trial. We have already held that for the purpose of quashing
the proceedings	 only  the  allegations	 set  forth  in	 the
complaint have to be seen and nothing further.
     From a perusal of the various clauses of the complaint,
including para	5, it is quite clear that a prima facie case
for summoning  the accused  has been  made out	and the High
Court was  absolutely wrong  in holding that the allegations
made in	 para S are vague. The High Court failed to consider
that the  allegations were quite clear and explicit so as to
be sufficient  for taking  cognizance of the offence against
the accused.
     Further details  would have to be given in the shape of
evidence when  the trial  proceeds and	in view of the clear
allegations made in para 5 of the complaint, we are not in a
position to  agree with the High Court that it is a fit case
in which  it should  have exercised  its discretion under s.
482 of	the Code  of Criminal  Procedure, 1973	in order  to
quash the proceedings against the accused-respondents.
     For these reasons, therefore, we allow this appeal, set
aside the judgment of the High Court and restore that of the
Metropolitan Magistrate as a result of which all the accused
will now be summoned and placed for trial in accordance with
law.
H.L.C.					     Appeal allowed.
898




