

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Munna & Others Etc vs State Of U.P. And Others Etc on 19 January, 1982Equivalent citations: 1982 AIR  806, 1982 SCR  (3)	 47
Author: P Bhagwati
Bench: Bhagwati, P.N.
           PETITIONER:
MUNNA & OTHERS ETC.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF U.P. AND OTHERS ETC.

DATE OF JUDGMENT19/01/1982

BENCH:
BHAGWATI, P.N.
BENCH:
BHAGWATI, P.N.
PATHAK, R.S.

CITATION:
 1982 AIR  806		  1982 SCR  (3)	 47
 1982 SCC  (1) 545	  1982 SCALE  (1)29


ACT:
     Constitution  of	India  1950,   Article	 32-Juvenile
undertrial prisoners-Ill-treatment and exploitation in jail-
Newspaper  report-Writ	 petition  filed   seeking   relief-
Allegations denied  by jailor-Allegations  held serious-Writ
petition cannot be summarily dismissed.
     Crime  and	 Punishment-Juvenile  delinquency-Inhibition
against sending	 children to jail-Person under sixteen years
of age-Not  to be  sent to jail-Detention in Children's Home
or `Place of safe'-Necessity of-Duty of Magistrates.
     Uttar Pradesh  Children Act  1951, ss. 2(9), 29, 30, 32
and 33	& Uttar	 Pradesh Children's Rules 1962, Rules 14 and
15. Child-Arrested  for Offence-Not  released on bail-Cannot
be sent to jail-Detention in `place of safety' or Children's
Home-Statutory	  requirement-Government     to	   implement
provisions  of	Act-Setting  up	 places	 for  detention	 for
children-Necessity of.



HEADNOTE:
     There writ	 petitions were	 filed alleging on the basis
of a  news report  in the Indian Express dated 2nd December,
1981 that one Mr. Madhu Mehta had visited the Kanpur Central
Jail  incognito	  and  found   several	juvenile  undertrial
prisoners lodged  there even  though there  was a Children's
Home in Kanpur, and that these juvenile prisoners were being
sexually exploited  by adult prisoners. Notice was issued to
the State of Uttar Pradesh.
     In the  meanwhile a writ petition was filed in the High
Court of  Allahabad  seeking  relief  in  respect  of  these
juvenile undertrial  prisoners. The  High Court	 decided  to
investigate and	 by its	 order	dated  18th  December,	1981
directed the  Sessions Judge of Kanpur to visit the Jail and
to report  whether any	detenu below the age of 16 years was
detained, whether  any detenu  below the age of 21 years was
being kept under fetters, and whether they were subjected to
torture by  adult prisoners as alleged in the writ petition.
The Sessions  Judge visited  the Jail on 21st December, 1981
and submitted  his report  dated 22nd  December, 1981 to the
High Court.  The report	 stated that  there were  admittedly
seven juvenile undertrial prisoners below the age of sixteen
in the	jail and  that one  Des Raj  was transferred  to the
Children's Home	 on 19th December, 1981 and that the rest of
the prisoners  happened to  be released	 on different  dates
between 7th  and 16th December, 1981 before the order of the
High Court  on 18th  December, 1981.  The Sessions  Judge in
Annexure `A'  to his  report gave  the names, ages and other
particulars of	84 undertrial prisoners who according to the
jail report  were above	 16 but	 below 21  years of  age and
stated	that   he  had	nine  from  among  these  undertrial
prisoners examined by the Chief Medical Officer and appended
the report  as Annexure	 `B'. He  further reported about the
general ignorance  of the  provisions of  the Uttar  Pradesh
Children's Act,	 1951 and  stated that he had instructed the
Jail Superin-
48
tendent and  the Jail Doctor that in case of any doubt about
the age	 of an	undertrial prisoner  they should  instead of
relying upon  the police  papers with  regard to age, obtain
the opinion of the Chief Medical Officer.
     In the writ petitions, it was
^
     HELD : 1. The allegations made in the writ petition are
serious. If  correct they  disclose to	what utter  depth of
depravity man  can  sink.  The	Court  cannot  abdicate	 its
constitutional	duty   of  ensuring  human  dignity  to	 the
juvenile undertrial  prisoners and  summarily throw  out the
writ petitions	merely on  the basis of a denial made by the
Assistant Jailor.  The instant case must be investigated not
only in	 the interest  of fair administration of justice but
also for  enforcing the	 basic human  rights  of  undertrial
prisoners who are alleged to have been ill-treated. [53 D-E]
     2. Juvenile  delinquency is, by and large, a product of
social and economic mal-adjustment. Even if it is found that
juveniles have	committed any offence they cannot be allowed
to be mal-treated. They do not shed their fundamental rights
when they enter the jail. [53 E-F]
     3. The  object  of	 punishment  being  reformation,  no
social objective can be gained by sending juveniles to jails
where they  would come	into contact with hardened criminals
and lose  whatever sensitivity	they may  have to  finer and
nobler sentiments.  That is the reason why Children Acts are
enacted by States all over the country and the Uttar Pradesh
Legislature has	 also enacted the Uttar Pradesh Children Act
1951. [53 F-G]
     4. The  inhibition against sending a child to jail does
not depend  upon any  proof that he is a child under the age
of 16 years but as soon as it appears that a person arrested
is apparently  under the  age of 16 years this inhibition is
attracted. The	reason	for  this  inhibition  lies  in	 the
solicitude which  the law entertains for juveniles below the
age of 16 years. [55 H, 56 A]
     5. The law is very much concerned to see that juveniles
do not	come into  contact with	 hardened criminals and that
chances of  reformation are  not blighted  by  contact	with
criminal offenders.  The law  throws a	cloak of  protection
round juveniles	 and seeks  to isolate	them  from  criminal
offenders, because  the emphasis placed by the law is not on
incarceration but on reformation. [56 B]
     6. When  a child  is arrested for an offence and is not
released on  bail, he  cannot be sent to jail but he must be
detained in a `place of safety' as defined in section 2 sub-
section (9)  of the  Act. The manner in which a child can be
detained is  prescribed	 in  the  Uttar	 Pradesh  Children's
Rules, 1962. Rule 14 provides that except as provided in the
Act, where  a child  having been arrested is not released on
bail under  section 23,	 the officer-in-charge of the Police
Station shall  cause him  to be	 detained  in  a  `place  of
safety' until  he can be brought before a court, and Rule 15
says that except as provided in the Act where a child is not
released on bail, the court shall on remanding or committing
a child	 for trial  order him  to be detained in a `place of
safety' pending the disposal of the proceedings. [55 G-H, 55
D-F]
     7. How  anxious is	 the law  to protect  young children
from contamination  with hardened criminals is apparent from
section 27 of the Act which provides
49
subject only to a few limited and exceptional cases referred
to in  the proviso,  that notwithstanding anything contained
to the	contrary, no  court can sentence a child to death or
transportation or imprisonment for any term or commit him to
prison in  default of payment of fine. Even where a child is
convicted of  an offence,  he is  not to be sent to a prison
but he	may be committed to an approved school under section
29 or  be either discharged or committed to suitable custody
under section  30. Even	 where a  child	 is  found  to	have
committed an offence of so serious a nature that court is of
opinion that no punishment which under the provisions of the
Act it	is authorised  to inflict,  is sufficient section 32
provides that  the offender  shall not	be sent	 to jail but
shall be  kept in safe custody in such place or manner as it
thinks fit  and shall  report the  case for the order of the
State Government.  Section 33  sets out	 various methods  of
dealing with  children charged with offences. But in no case
except the  exceptional ones  mentioned in  the Act, a child
can be sent to jail.
     8(i) It  is impressed upon the magistrates in the State
of Uttar  Pradesh and also in the other parts of the country
that where  the Children  Acts are  in force  they  must  be
extremely careful to see that no person apparently under the
age of 16 years is sent to jail but he must be detained in a
Children's Home	 or other  `place of  safety'.	(ii)  It  is
absolutely essential in order to implement the provisions of
the Uttar Pradesh Children Act, 1951 that Children's Home or
other suitable places of safety are set up by the Government
for the	 purpose of  providing	a  place  of  detention	 for
children under the age of 16 years. [56 C-H, 57 A]
     The Court also gave the following directions :
     (1) Since	the Assistant Jailor has denied the visit of
Shri Madhu  Mehta, it  is necessary  that Shri	Madhu  Mehta
should be  impleaded as	 a  party  respondent  to  the	writ
petitions so  that he  can state  an oath whether he visited
the Jail,  and if  so what were the facts which he observed.
[53 B-C]
     (2) The  Superintendent of	 the Jail  to  inform  by  a
proper affidavit  as to what were the circumstances in which
the six	 children whose	 names are given at serial numbers 2
to 7  in Annexure  `B' were  released and  also produce	 the
orders of the Magistrate directing their release. He is also
to inform  why Des  Raj was  detained in  the Jail  from 7th
March, 1981  though he	was admittedly	even on the basis of
the jail  records a  child below  16 years of age and how it
happened that  suddenly on  19th December, 1981 an order was
obtained for  transferring him	to the	Children's Home. The
State of  Uttar Pradesh	 and the  Superintendent of the Jail
will explain  why an  order for	 transfer of  Des Raj to the
Children's Home could not be obtained earlier. [54 C-E]
     (3)  The	Registrar  of  the  High  Court	 to  forward
immediately copies  of all  Annexures to  the Report  of the
Sessions Judge. [54 F]
     (4) According to the report of the Sessions Judge there
were seven juvenile undertrial prisoners below the age of 16
years. Out  of these six were released prior to the visit of
the Sessions  Judge,  and  they	 could	not,  therefore,  be
interviewed. Shri  O.P. Garg, Secretary of the Uttar Pradesh
State Board  of Legal  Aid and Advice to immediately contact
these six  children after finding out their addresses either
from the court proceedings or from the jail records and take
50
their statements  with a  view to  ascertain  what  was	 the
treatment meted	 out to	 them in the jail and whether any of
them was  mal-treated. The  report to  be  submitted  on  or
before 27th January, 1982. [53 G-H, 54 A-B]



JUDGMENT:
     ORIGINAL JURISDICTION  : Writ  Petition Nos. 9133, 8974
of 1981 & 6 of 1982.
     Under article 32 of the Constitution of India.
     Krishan Mahajan for the Petitioner in WP. 6/82.
     Miss Lily Thomas for the Petitioner in WP. 8974/81.
     Mrs. K. Hingorani for the Petitioner in WP. 9133/81.
     R.K. Bhatt for Respondent in all WPs.
     The Order of the Court was delivered by
     BHAGWATI, J.  These three writ petitions come before us
on notice to the State of Uttar Pradesh. They seek relief in
respect of  certain juvenile  undertrial  prisoners  in	 the
Kanpur Central	Jail. The  allegations in  respect of  these
juvenile undertrial  prisoners are  that though	 there is  a
Children's  Home   in  Kanpur,	 these	juvenile  undertrial
prisoners who  are, according to the allegations in the writ
petitioners, more  than 100  in number	are  lodged  in	 the
Kanpur Central	Jail instead of being sent to the Children's
Home and  they are  being sexually  exploited by  the  adult
prisoners. These  allegations are  based on  a	news  report
published in  the issue	 of the	 Indian	 Express  dated	 2nd
December, 1981	where a reference is made to a visit of Shri
Madhu Mehta  of the Hindustani Andolan to the Kanpur Central
Jail incognito.	 Shri Madhu  Mehta, according  to this	news
report, found that "young boys of 10 to 14 years" were being
"supplied to convicts for their delectation" and a boy named
Munna whom  he met,  was in  agony because "after the way he
was used,  he was  unable to  sit." When  these	 three	writ
petitions based on the news report came up for admission, it
was  not   possible  to	  state	 whether  these	 allegations
contained in  the news	report were  correct or	 not. But if
they were  correct, they  disclosed an extremely distressing
state of  affairs and  they were  sufficient  to  shock	 the
conscience of the court. The Court, therefore, issued notice
to the	State of  Uttar Pradesh	 in each of these three writ
petitions. But,	 it appears  that, in  the meanwhile, a writ
petition bearing  number 14645 of 1981 was also filed in the
High Court of Allahabad by an organisation called
51
Human Rights Organisation seeking relief in respect of these
juvenile undertrial prisoners and on this writ petition, the
High Court of Allahabad rightly activated itself and decided
to investigate	into the  matter and  with that end in view,
made an	 order dated  18th  December,  1981  requesting	 the
senior most  Sessions Judge  of Kanpur	to visit  the Kanpur
Central Jail and to make a report on the following points:
     1.	  Whether there	 is any	 detenu below  the age of 16
	  years who  is being  detained in  the Distt. Jail,
	  Kanpur ?  if so, the names of such detenus and the
	  offences in  connection with	which they are being
	  detained be indicated.
     2.	  Whether any  detenu below  the age  of 21 years is
	  being kept  under fetters  or was being kept under
	  fetters ?
     3.	  Whether any  such person  is	being  subjected  to
	  torture of the nature mentioned in the petition ?
     4.	  Whether such	inmates	 of  the  prison  are  being
	  provided with proper medical facilities ?
The Sessions  Judge accordingly	 visited the  Kanpur Central
Jail on	 21st December,	 1981 and submitted his Report dated
22nd December,	1981 to	 the High  Court of Allahabad. We do
not propose to consider this Report in detail at this stage,
but suffice it to state that according to this Report, there
were admittedly	 seven juvenile	 undertrial prisoners  below
the age	 of 16	in the	Kanpur Central	Jail, but, curiously
enough, barring	 one Deshraj  who  was	transferred  to	 the
Children's Home	 Kanpur on 19th December, 1981, all the rest
happened to  be released  on different dates between 7th and
16th December,	1981, before the order made by the Allahabad
High Court  on 18th December, 1981. It is rather interesting
to note	 that the  news report	in the	issue of  the Indian
Express	 was  published	 on  2nd  December,  1981  and	writ
petition No.  8974/81 which is the first of these three writ
petitions was  filed by	 Miss Lily  Thomas on  3rd December,
1981 and  these juvenile  undertrial prisoners were released
within a  few days of the publication of the news report and
the filing  of the  writ petition. even so far as Deshraj is
concerned, though he was admitted in the Kanpur Central Jail
on 7th	March, 1981 he was not transferred to the Children's
Home Kanpur  until 19th	 December, 1981	 after the order was
made by the Allahabad High Court. The consequence of release
of these  undertrial juvenile prisoners, except Deshraj, was
that the Sessions Judge could not
52
interview any  of them	when he	 visited the  Kanpur Central
Jail on	 21st December,	 1981. The  Sessions Judge  gave  in
Annexure to his Report the names, ages and other particulars
of 84  undertrial  prisoners  who,  according  to  the	jail
record, were  above 16	but below  21 years of age and added
that the  possibility could  not be ruled out that on proper
scientific medical  examination, three	or four out of these
84 undertrial  prisoners might be found to be below 16 years
of age.	 The Sessions  Judge picked  out nine  from  amongst
these undertrial  prisoners and	 got them  examined  by	 tho
Chief Medical  officer and  enclosed the Report of the Chief
Medical officer	 as Annexure  to his  Report.  The  Sessions
Judge also  reported  that  there  appeared  to	 be  general
ignorance in the Kanpur Central Jail about the provisions of
the U.P. Children Act, 1951 and observed:
	  "All	the  child  accused  mentioned	in  Annexure
     should have  been produced	 before the  Juvenile  Judge
     after their  arrest. Where	 there was doubt whether the
     detenu was	 above the  age of 16 or below it, he should
     have been	sent for  medical report  in connection with
     his age  and on  being found to be a child, should have
     been dealt in accordance with the Children Act."
The Sessions  Judge instructed	the Jail  Superintendent and
the jail  doctor that  in case there was any doubt about the
age of	an under  trial prisoner,  they	 should	 instead  of
relying upon  the police  papers with  regard to age, obtain
the opinion  of the  Chief Medical  officer and "apprise the
court concerned	 of it so that the presiding officer directs
the accused  to be  produced before  the Juvenile  Judge  to
enable him  to take  the benefit  of the  provisions of	 the
Children Act for a better social order." We do not know what
order has  been passed	by the	Allahabad High	Court in the
writ petition  before it but when these three writ petitions
came up	 for hearing  before us	 on 5th	 January, 1982,	 the
Report of  the Sessions	 Judge was  placed before  us and an
affidavit in reply was also filed by the Assistant Jailer of
the Kanpur  Central Jail denying the allegations made in the
news report.
     Now  in   the  first  place,  since  these	 three	writ
Petitions are  based upon  certain statements  said to	have
been made by Shri Madhu Mehta and set out in the news report
of the	Indian Express,	 we think  it would  be desirable to
join Shri Madhu Mehta as a party
53
respondent in  each of	the three writ petitions, so that he
can place  A before  the court all the facts gathered by him
in regard  to the  juvenile inmates  of the  Kanpur  Central
Jail. The  Assistant Jailer  has in  his affidavit  in reply
disputed that  Shri Madhu  Mehta ever  visited the jail, but
since, according  to  the  news	 report,  Shri	Madhu  Mehta
entered the  jail incognito,  it is  quite possible that the
Assistant Jailer  may not have any record of his visit. But,
since the  Assistant Jailer  has denied	 the visit  of	Shri
Madhu Mehta,  we think	it necessary  that Shri	 Madhu Mehta
should be  impleaded as	 a  party  respondent  to  the	writ
petitions so  that he  can state  on oath whether he visited
the Kanpur  Central Jail and if so, what were the fact which
he observed. We cannot reject in limine the allegations made
in the	news report in regard to what Shri Madhu Mehta found
in the	course of  his visit  to the  Kanpur  Central  Jail,
merely because	the Assistant  Jailer has disputed the visit
of Shri	 Madhu Mehta.  The allegations are indeed so serious
and, if	 correct, disclose to what utter depths of depravity
man  can   sink,  that	 the  court   cannot  abdicate	 its
constitutional	duty   of  ensuring  human  dignity  to	 the
juvenile undertrial  prisoners and  summarily throw  out the
three writ petitions merely on the basis of a denial made by
the Assistant  Jailer. We  must investigate into this matter
not only  in the  interest of fair administration of justice
but also  for enforcing	 the basic  human  rights  of  these
unfortunate juvenile undertrial prisoners who are alleged to
have been  the	victims	 of  sexual  exploitation.  Juvenile
delinquency is,	 by and	 large,	 a  product  of	 social	 and
economic maladjustment.	 Even if  it  is  found	 that  these
juveniles  have	 committed  any	 offences,  they  cannot  be
allowed to be maltreated. They do not shed their fundamental
rights when  they enter	 the jail.  Moreover, the  object of
punishment being  reformation, we  fail to  see what  social
objective can  be gained by sending juveniles to jails where
they would  come into  contact with  hardened criminals	 and
lose whatever  sensitivity they may have to finer and nobler
sentiments. That is the reason why Children Acts are enacted
by States  all over the country and the U.P. Legislature has
also enacted  the Uttar	 Pradesh Children  Act, 1951. Since,
according to  the Report of the Sessions Judge, there were 7
juvenile undertrial prisoner below the age of 16 years, that
being the  limit of  age below	which a	 juvenile  would  be
regarded as  a 'child'	within	the  meaning  of  the  Uttar
Pradesh Children  Act, 1951,  and out  of these	 seven child
undertrial prisoners,  six were	 released prior to the visit
of the	Session	 Judge	and  they  could  not  therefore  be
interviewed by the Sessions Judge, we would direct Shri O.P,
Garg, Secretary of the U.P. State Board of Legal Aid and
54
Advice, to  immediately contact	 these	six  children  after
finding	 out   their  addresses	  either  from	 the   court
proceedings  or	  from	the  jail  records  and	 take  their
statements  with   a  view  to	ascertaining  what  was	 the
treatment meted	 out to	 them in the Kanpur Central Jail and
whether any  of them  was maltreated  or sexually exploited.
Shri O.P.  Garg will  immediately without any delay, proceed
to take the statements of these six children and submit them
to this	 Court along  with his	report	on  or	before	27th
January, 1982.	His expenses  may be  met by  the U.P. State
Board of Legal Aid and Advice.
     We should	also like the State of Uttar Pradesh and the
Superintendent of  the Kanpur Central Jail to inform us by a
proper	affidavit  before  the	next  hearing  of  the	writ
petitions as  to what  were the circumstances in which these
six children  whose names are given at serial numbers 2 to 7
in Annexure  were released,  and also  produce before us the
orders of the Magistrates directing their release. We should
also like  the State of Uttar Pradesh and the Superintendent
of the	Kanpur Central	Jail to	 inform us as to why Deshraj
was detained in the Kanpur Central Jail from 7th March, 198]
though he  was admittedly,  even on  the basis	of the	jail
records, a child below 16 years of age and how did it happen
that suddenly  on 19th December. 1981, an order was obtained
for transferring  him to  the Children's  Home, Kanpur.	 The
State of  Uttar Pradesh and the Superintendent of the Kanpur
Central Jail  will also	 explain as to why such an order for
transfer of  Deshraj to the Children's Home Kanpur could not
be obtained earlier.
     The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the State of
Uttar Pradesh handed over to us copies of Annexures A and B,
but we	do not	have copies  of the  other annexures  to the
Report of the Sessions Judge. We would therefore request the
Registrar of  the High	Court of  Allahabad to forward to us
immediately copies of all the annexures to the Report of the
Sessions Judge. The copies may be in quadruplicate.
     Since, according to the Report of the Sessions Judge, 7
children were  lodged in the Kanpur Central Jail and perhaps
a few  more out	 of the 84 undertrial prisoners mentioned in
Annexure A  to	the  Report  of	 the  Sessions	Judge  could
possibly be  children within  the meaning  of Uttar  Pradesh
Children Act,  1951, we	 think it  is necessary to point out
that under  the provisions of that Act, no child can, except
in the rare cases provided in the Act? be detained
55
in  jail.   Chapter  IV	 of  the  Act  deals  with  youthful
offenders. Section  23 which occurs in this chapter provides
in sub-section	(1) that  when a person apparently under the
ate of	16 years  is arrested for a non-bailable offence and
cannot be  brought forth  before a  court,  the	 officer-in-
charge of the police station to which such person is brought
may in	any case  and shall.  unless the  offence is  one of
culpable homicide  or is an offence punishable with death or
transportation release	him on bail unless for reasons to be
recorded in  writing the  officer believes that such release
will bring him into association with any reputed criminal or
expose him  to moral danger or that his release would defeat
the ends  of justice. Section 24 then proceeds to enact that
when a	person apparently  under the  age of 16 years having
been arrested is not released under section 23 or otherwise,
the officer-in-charge of the police station, shall cause him
to be  detained in  the prescribed  manner until  he can  be
brought before	a court.  So also section 25 provides that a
court, on  remanding or	 committing for trial a child who is
not released  on bail, shall order him to be detained in the
prescribed manner.  The manner	in  which  a  child  can  be
detained is  prescribed by the Uttar Pradesh Children Rules,
1962 made  in exercise	of the	powers conferred  under sub-
section (I) of Section 88 of the Uttar Pradesh Children Act,
1951. Rules  14 and  IS are  the relevant  rules which	make
provision in  this behalf.  Rule 14  provides that except as
provided in  the Act,  where a child having been arrested is
not released on bail under section 23, the officer-in-charge
of the	police station	shall cause  him to be detained in a
place of  safety until	he can be brought before a court and
rule I	S says	that except  as provided in the Act, where a
child is  not released on bail, the court shall on remanding
or committing  a child for trial order him to be detained in
a place	 of safety  pending the	 disposal of The proceeding.
What is	 a "place  of safety"  is defined in section 2, sub-
section (9) of the Act to mean, "any observation home or any
orphanage,  hospital,	or  any	 other,	 suitable  place  or
institution the	 occupier or  manager of  which	 is  willing
temporarily to	receive a  child, or  where such observation
home,  orphanage,   hospital  or  other	 suitable  place  of
institution is	not available  in the  case of	a male child
only, a	 police station	 in which arrangements are available
or can	be made	 for the  safe keeping of a child separately
from adult  offenders." It  is therefore  clear that  when a
child is  arrested for	an offence  and is  not released  on
bail, he cannot be sent to jail but he must be detained in a
place of  safety as  defined in section 2 sub-section (9) of
the Act. The inhibition against sending a child to jail does
not depend upon any proof that
56
he is  a child	under the  age of 16 years but as soon as it
appears that  a person	arrested is apparently under the age
of 16  years this  inhibition is  attracted. The  reason for
this inhibition	 lies in  the court  solitude which  the law
entertains for	juveniles below the age of 16 years. The law
is very much concerned to see that juvenile do not come into
contact	 with	hardened  criminals  and  their	 chances  of
reformation  are  not  blighted	 by  contact  with  criminal
offenders. The	law  throws  a	clock  of  protection  round
juveniles and seeks to isolate them from criminal offenders,
because	 the   emphasis	 placed	  by  the   law	 is  not  on
incarceration but  on reformation. How anxious is the law to
protect young  children	 from  contamination  with  hardened
criminals is  also apparent from section 27 of the Act which
provides, subject  only to  a few  limited  and	 exceptional
cases referred	to  in	the  proviso,  that  notwithstanding
anything contained  to the contrary, no court can sentence a
child to  death or  transportation or  imprisonment for	 any
term or	 commit him to prison in default of payment of fine.
It would  thus be  seen that even where a child is convicted
of an  offence, he  it not to be sent to a prison but he may
be committed  to an  approved school  under section  29 or -
either discharged  or committed	 to suitable  custody  under
section 30. Even where a child is found to have committed an
offence of  so serious a nature that the court is of opinion
that no	 punishment which under the provisions of the Act it
is authorised  to inflict is sufficient, section 32 provides
that the  of tender  shall not	be sent	 to ail but shall be
kept in	 safe custody  in such	place or manner as it thinks
fit and	 shall report  the case	 for the orders of the State
Government. Section  33 sets  out various methods of dealing
with children  charged with  offences. But in no case except
the exceptional	 ones mentioned	 in the	 Act, a child can be
sent to jail. It is therefore very surprising that the seven
children whose names are mentioned in Annexure to the Report
of the	Sessions Judge were sent by the concerned Magistrate
to jail	 instead of  being sent	 to Children's Home which we
believe was  a place of safety in Kanpur with the meaning of
section 2  sub-section (9)  of the  Act. We  would  strongly
impress upon  the magistrates in the State of Uttar Pradesh-
and what  we say  here must  apply mutatis  mutandis to	 the
magistrates in	the other  parts of  the country  where	 the
Children Acts  are in  force, that  they must  be  extremely
careful to see that no person apparently under the age of 16
years is  sent	to  jail  but  he  must	 be  detained  in  a
Children's  Home   or  other  place  of	 safety.  It  11  is
absolutely essential in order to implement the provisions of
the Uttar Pradesh Children Act, 1951 that children's Home or
other
57
suitable places	 of safety  are set up by the government for
the purpose  of providing  a place of detention for children
under the  age of  16 years.  No words	we can	use would be
strong enough  to convey  our feelings	in this	 respect.  A
nation which  is not  concerned	 with  the  welfare  of	 its
children cannot look forward to a bright future.
     With these	 observations, we  adjourn  the	 hearing  of
these three writ petitions to 29th January, 1982.
N.V.K.
58
