

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Smt. Anand Kaur vs Pritam Lal on 14 January, 1982Equivalent citations: 1982 AIR  777, 1982 SCR  (3)	 43
Author: A Koshal
Bench: Koshal, A.D.
           PETITIONER:
SMT. ANAND KAUR

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
PRITAM LAL

DATE OF JUDGMENT14/01/1982

BENCH:
KOSHAL, A.D.
BENCH:
KOSHAL, A.D.
ERADI, V. BALAKRISHNA (J)
MISRA, R.B. (J)

CITATION:
 1982 AIR  777		  1982 SCR  (3)	 43
 1982 SCC  (1) 502	  1982 SCALE  (1)2


ACT:
     Delhi Rent	 Control Act-Section 14(1), proviso (a) read
with proviso to section 14(2)-scope of.



HEADNOTE:
     When a  tenant has	 neither paid nor tendered the whole
of the	arrears of  rent legally recoverable from him within
two months of the date on which the notice of demand for the
arrears of  rent has  been served  on him  by  the  landlord
proviso (a) to section 14(1) empowers the Controller to make
an order for the recovery of possession of the premises. The
proviso to  section 14(2)  states that	no tenant  shall  be
entitled to  the benefit  under the  sub-section  if  having
obtained such  benefit once  in respect	 of any	 premises he
again makes  a default	in the	payment	 of  rent  of  those
premises for three consecutive months.
     On 14th  December, 1973, the land-lady-appellant issued
a notice  to the  tenant stating  that he  had not  paid the
damages after  May 1973	 and called  upon  him	to  pay	 the
arrears within	two months  from the  date  of	notice.	 The
tenant remitted	 the rent  to the  land-lady by	 money-order
towards the  end of  February 1974 but she refused to accept
the same.
     On the  land-lady's application the Controller, and the
Tribunal in  appeal, held that the notice was valid and that
the expression	"damages for  the use  and occupation" meant
nothing more  nor less	than rent.  But the  High  Court  on
appeal held  that the  term "rent"  and "damages for use and
occupation" could  not be  taken to  be synonymous terms and
that the  notice issued by the land-lady did not satisfy the
requirements of	 clause (a)  of the proviso to section 14(1)
of the Act in that it did not demand rent from the tenant.
     Allowing the appeal and remitting the case to the Court
below
^
     HELD: The	notice issued by the land-lady satisfies the
requirements of	 clause (a) of the proviso to section 14(1).
[46 D]
     The   High	   Court   has	  taken	  an   unnecessarily
hypertechnical view  of the  contents of  the  notice  which
specifically stated  that on  account of  the termination of
the tenancy  by an  earlier notice  the tenant	had become a
statutory tenant and it was in this context that a claim was
made for damages for use and occupation at a rate equivalent
to the	agreed	rent.  The  demand  so	made  could  not  be
construed as anything but a demand for rent. [46 B-C]
44



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Civil  Appeal No. 966 of
1976.
     (Appeal by	 special leave	from the  judgment and order
dated the  6th February,  1976 of  the Delhi  High Court  in
S.A.O. No. 148 of 1975)
     Vinoo Bhagat for the Appellant.
     G. D. Gupta for the Respondent (Not Present)
     The Order of the Court was delivered by
     KOSHAL, J. The short point arising for determination in
this appeal  concerns the validity of a notice served by the
landlady appellant  on the  tenant-respondent and purporting
to be one issued in accordance with the provisions contained
in clause  (a) of sub-section (1) of section 14 of the Delhi
Rent Control Act (hereinafter called the Act), and we may at
the very  outset reproduce  the relevant  provisions of that
section:
	  "14(1) Notwithstanding  anything to  the  contrary
     contained in  any other  law or  contract, no  order or
     decree for	 the recovery  of possession of any premises
     shall be  made by	any court or Controller in favour of
     the landlord against a tenant:
	  Provided  that   the	 Controller   may,   on	  an
     application made  to him in the prescribed manner, make
     an order for the recovery of possession of the premises
     on one or more of the following grounds only, namely:
	       (a) that	 the tenant  has  neither  paid	 nor
	  tendered the	whole of  the arrears  of  the	rent
	  legally recoverable  from him within two months of
	  the date  on which  a notice	of  demand  for	 the
	  arrears of  rent has	been served  on him  by	 the
	  landlord in  the manner provided in section 106 of
	  the Transfer of Property Act, 1882;
	  14(2) No  order for  the recovery of possession of
     any premises  shall be  made on the ground specified in
     clause
45
     (a) of  the proviso  to sub-section  (1), if the tenant
     makes payment or deposit as required by section 15:
	  Provided that	 no tenant  shall be entitled to the
     benefit under this sub-section, if having obtained such
     benefit once in respect of any premises, he again makes
     a default	in the payment of rent of those premises for
     three consecutive months."
     2.	 The  tenant  respondent  has  remained	 absent	 and
unrepresented at  the hearing  and we have had the advantage
of being  addressed by Mr. Vinoo Bhagat, learned counsel for
the appellant only.
     3. It was not disputed before the High Court that in an
earlier proceeding  the tenant	had taken  advantage of	 the
provisions contained in sub-section (2) of section 14 of the
Act, that  he committed	 another default  in the  payment of
rent which  covered the	 period from  1.6.1973 to 30.11.1973
and that  it was  then that  a notice  dated 14.12.1973	 was
served on him. The notice stated:
	  "Your contractual  tenancy in respect of House No.
     A-54 (double-storey)  Kalkaji, New Delhi-19 had already
     been terminated  whereafter you  are a statutory tenant
     liable to	pay damages  for use  and occupation  at the
     rate of Rs. 15/- (Rupees fifteen per month) to me. That
     you have  not paid the said damages after May, 1973. In
     case you  do not clear the arrears upto date within two
     months from  the  date  of	 this  notice,	I  shall  be
     compelled to  issue instructions to my legal adviser to
     file an application for your eviction .........."
     No attempt	 to pay	 the rent  was made  inspite of	 the
notice till  the end  of February, 1974. Although thereafter
rent was  remitted to  the landlady through money orders but
she refused  to accept	the same  and made an application to
the Controller for eviction of the tenant on the sole ground
of a  second default  in  the  payment	of  rent.  Both	 the
Controller and	the Tribunal  in the  appeal held  that	 the
notice was  a valid one and that the expression "damages for
use and	 occupation" contained therein meant nothing more or
less than  rent. In  a second appeal, a learned Single Judge
differed from  the Courts  below and was of the opinion that
the word  'rent' and  the said expression could not be taken
to be
46
synonymous and	that there  was no  demand of  rent  in	 the
notice in  question which  did not,  therefore, satisfy	 the
requirements of the provisions contained in clause (a) above
extracted. It  is the  judgment of  the learned Single Judge
which is assailed in the present appeal.
     4. After  hearing Mr. Vinoo Bhagat, learned counsel for
the appellant, we are of the opinion that the learned Single
Judge has  taken an unnecessarily hypertechnical view of the
contents of  the notice.  It is	 significant that the notice
specifically stated  that on  account of  the termination of
the tenancy  by an earlier notice the tenant had become what
is popularly  known as a statutory tenant and it was in this
context that  a claim  was made	 for  damages  for  use	 and
occupation at  a rate  equivalent to the agreed rent. We are
of the	opinion that  in the  circumstances of	the case the
demand so  made could  not be  construed as  anything but  a
demand for  rent. Consequently	the notice  must be  held to
satisfy the requirements of clause (a) of sub-section (1) of
Section 14 of the Act.
     5. For  the reasons stated above, we accept the appeal,
set aside  the impugned	 judgment and  restore the orders of
the Controller	and the	 Tribunal. The	case is remitted for
further proceedings  to the  Controller who shall dispose of
it within three months from the receipt of records from this
Court. No costs.
P.B.R.	  Appeal allowed.
47
