

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Kuljit Singh Alias Ranga vs Lt. Governor Of Delhi & Ors on 20 January, 1982Equivalent citations: 1982 AIR  774, 1982 SCR  (3)	 58
Author: Y Chandrachud
Bench: Chandrachud, Y.V. ((Cj)
           PETITIONER:
KULJIT SINGH ALIAS RANGA

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
LT. GOVERNOR OF DELHI & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT20/01/1982

BENCH:
CHANDRACHUD, Y.V. ((CJ)
BENCH:
CHANDRACHUD, Y.V. ((CJ)
REDDY, O. CHINNAPPA (J)
SEN, A.P. (J)

CITATION:
 1982 AIR  774		  1982 SCR  (3)	 58
 1982 SCC  (1) 417	  1982 SCALE  (1)1
 CITATOR INFO :
 RF	    1989 SC 653	 (9)


ACT:
     Clemency  jurisdiction-Power   of	President  to  grant
pardon etc.  and to  suspend, remit  or commute sentences in
certain cases-Constitution of India, 1950, Article 72, scope
of the power.



HEADNOTE:
     Dismissing the petition, the Court
^
     HELD: 1.  Whatever be  the guidelines  observed for the
exercise of  the  power	 conferred  by	Article	 72  of	 the
Constitution. the  only	 sentence  which  can,	possibly  be
imposed upon  the petitioner in The instant case, is that of
death and  no circumstances exist for interference with that
sentence. Not  even  tho  most	liberal	 use  of  his  mercy
jurisdiction could have persuaded tho President to interfere
with the  sentence of  death imposed  upon the petitioner in
view particularly  of the  considerations mentioned  in	 KS.
Ranga v.  Union of  India and  Anr., [1981]  - 3 S.C R. 512.
Therefore, in  refusing to  commute the	 sentence the  death
imposed upon  the petitioner  into  a  lesser  sentence	 the
President  has	 not  in   any	 manner	  transgressed	 his
discretionary power under Article 72. [59 D-E, 60 B-C]
     2. Undoubtedly,  the President  has  the  power  in  an
appropriate case  to commute  any sentence  imposed by Court
into a	lesser sentence.  But tho question as to whether the
case is	 appropriate for the exercise of the power conferred
by Article  72 depends	upon the  facts and circumstances of
each particular case. [59 E, G]
     3. After  all the	power conferred by Article 72 can be
used only  for the purpose of reducing the sentence, not for
enhancing it.  Therefore, no useful purpose will be achieved
by the	petitioner by ensuring the imposition of any severe,
judicially evolved constraints on the wholesome power of the
President to  use it  as the  justice of a case may require.
[59 H, 60 A]
     James Shewan  & Sons v. United Stares, 69 L. Ed. 527 at
535, referred to.



JUDGMENT:
     ORIGINAL JURISDICTION:  Writ Petition  (Crl.) No. 8193A
of 1981.
     (Under Article 32 of the Constitution of India)
     R. K  Garg, V.  J. Francis,  Sunil Kumar  Jain and D. K
Garg for the Petitioner-Ranga
59
     R. K. Jain and P K. Jain for the Petitioner-Billa.
     N. C. Talukdar and R. N. Poddar for Respondent No. 1.
     L. N.  Sinha, Attorney  General and  Miss A. Subhashini
for Attorney General.
     K.	 Parasaran,   Solicitor	 General,   M.	K.  Banerji,
Additional Solicitor  General and  Miss	 A.  Subhashini	 for
Union of India.
     N. Nettar for the State of Karnataka.
     Raju Ramachandran	for  Applicant/intervener-Chhaganlal
Aggarwal.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     CHANDRACHUD C.  J. The question as regards the scope of
the  power   of	 the  President	 under	article	 72  of	 the
Constitution to	 commute a  sentence of	 death into a lesser
sentence may  have to  await examination  on an	 appropriate
occasion. This	clearly is  not that  occasion because in so
far as	this case  is concerned,  whatever be the guidelines
observed for  the exercise of the power conferred by article
72, the only sentence which can possibly be imposed upon the
petitioner is  that of	death and no circumstances exist for
interference  with   that  sentence.  Therefore	 we  see  no
justification for  saying that	in refusing  to commute	 the
sentence of  death imposed upon the petitioner into a lesser
sentence, the  President has  in any manner transgressed his
discretionary  power  under  article  72.  Undoubtedly,	 the
President has  the power  in an	 appropriate case to commute
any sentence  imposed by  a court into a lesser sentence and
as said	 by Chief  Justice Taft	 in James  Shewan &  Sons  v
United States,	the "executive	clemency  exists  to  afford
relief from  undue  harshness  or  evident  mistake  in	 the
operation or  enforcement of  the criminal law" and that the
administration of  justice by  the courts is not necessarily
or certainly considerate of circumstances which may properly
mitigate guilt.	 But the  question as to whether the case is
appropriate for	 the exercise  of  the	power  conferred  by
Article 72  depends upon the facts and circumstances of each
particular case.  The necessity	 or  the  justification	 for
exercising that	 power has  therefore to be judged from case
to case.  In fact, we do not see what useful purpose will be
achieved by the petitioner by
60
ensuring the  imposition of  any severe, judicially- evolved
constraints on	the wholesome  power of the President to use
it as  the justice  of a  case may  require. After  all, the
power conferred	 by Article  72 can  be used  only  for	 the
purpose of  reducing the  sentence, not for enhancing it. We
need not, however, go into that question elaborately because
in so far as this case is concerned, we are quite clear that
not even  the most  liberal use	 of his	 mercy	jurisdiction
could have  persuaded the  President to	 interfere with	 the
sentence of  death imposed  upon  the  petitioner,  in	view
particularly of	 the considerations  mentioned by  us in our
judgment in  Kuljeet Singh  @ Ranga v. Union of India & Anr.
We may	recall what we said in that judgment that "the death
of the	Chopra children was caused by the petitioner and his
companion Billa	 after	a  savage  planning  which  bears  a
professional  stamp",  that  the  "survival  of	 an  orderly
society demands	 the extinction	 of the life of persons like
Ranga and  Billa who  are  a  menace  to  social  order	 and
security", and	that "they  are professional  murderers	 and
deserve no  sympathy even in terms of the evolving standards
of decency of a mature society".
     The petition is accordingly dismissed.
     We have  heard Shri  R. K.	 Jain as amicus on behalf of
the accused  Billa. We	see  no	 substance  in	Shri  Jain's
contentions also.
     The order	of stay	 of execution  of the death sentence
which we had passed in favour of the accused Ranga and Billa
as also	 the general  order of stay are hereby vacated If in
any specific  case or  cases there  is an  express order  of
stay, it  will not  be affected	 by the	 order which  we are
passing today.
S.R.					Petition dismissed.
61




