

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Satya Narain Singh Etc. Etc vs The High Court Of Judicatureat ... on 27 November, 1984Equivalent citations: 1985 AIR  308, 1985 SCR  (2) 112
Author: O C Reddy
Bench: Reddy, O. Chinnappa (J)
           PETITIONER:
SATYA NARAIN SINGH ETC. ETC.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATUREAT ALLAHABAD & ORS., ETC. ETC.

DATE OF JUDGMENT27/11/1984

BENCH:
REDDY, O. CHINNAPPA (J)
BENCH:
REDDY, O. CHINNAPPA (J)
SEN, A.P. (J)
VENKATARAMIAH, E.S. (J)

CITATION:
 1985 AIR  308		  1985 SCR  (2) 112
 1985 SCC  (1) 225	  1984 SCALE  (2)790


ACT:
     Constitution   of	 India	 - article  233	 Appointment
of District   Judges-Interpretation  of - Persons already in
service cannot	 be  appointed	District  Judges  by  direct
recruitment. Clause(2)	of Art.233  is	applicable  only  to
persons not  already in the  Service of the Union o r of the
State -	 Service  here	means judicial	service	 Requirement
of seven  years	 practice  at  bar necessary only in case of
persons not already in service



HEADNOTE:
     In	  response   to an advertisement by the	 High  Court
of Allahabad, the petitioners, who were members of the Uttar
Pradesh Judicial  Service, applied to be appointed by direct
recruitment to	 the  Uttar Pradesh Higher Judicial Service.
The   petitioners claimed   that they had acquired 7 years h
of practice  at the   bar even	before	their appointment to
that Service.  The   High   Court held	that members  of the
Uttar Pradesh  Judicial Service	 were	not eligible   to be
appointed by  direct recruitment  to Uttar   Pradesh  Higher
Judicial  Service.   Before  this   Court  the	 petitioners
submitted  that	  a  construction   of	Art.   233  of	 the
Constitution  which would render a member of the Subordinate
Judicial Service   ineligible  for appointment to the Higher
Judicial Service  by   direct  recruitment  because  of	 the
additional experience  gained by  him as  a Judicial officer
would be both 11 unjust and paradoxical.
     Affirming	   the	decision   of  the  High  Court	 and
dismissing the petitions,
^
     HELD: Two	points straightway  project themselves	when
the two	 clauses of  Art. 233  of the Constitution are read:
'The   first clause  deals with	 'appointments of persons to
be, and	 the posting  and   promotion of, district judges in
any State  while the   second  clause	is confined  in	 its
application to	persons not  already   in the service of the
Union or of the
113
State'.	  'Service of  the Union  or of the State' has	been
interpreted by	A this Court to mean judicial service. While
the  first clause  makes consultation by the Governor of the
State with   the  High	 Court necessary,  the second clause
requires that	the   High  Court  must	 recommend  a person
for appointment	  as   a   District  Judge. It	is  only  in
respect of  the persons	 covered by  the second	 clause that
there is  a requirement	 that	person shall be eligible for
appointment as	District Judge if he has been an advocate or
a pleader  for not less than 7 years. In other words, in the
case of	 candidates   who are  not  members  of	 a  Judicial
Service	  they	 must have   been  advocates or pleaders for
not less  than 7   years  and they have to be recommended by
the High  Court before	they may   be  appointed as District
Judges, while in the case of candidates who are members of a
Judicial Service  the 7	 years rule has no  application	 but
there has  to be consultation with the High  Court.  A clear
distinction is	made between the two sources of	 recruitment
and   the   dichotomy is  maintained. The  two streams	 are
separate until they come together by appointment. [116 D-G]
     Ramcshwar	 Dayal v.  Stat of  Punjab, [196112  SCR 874
and Chander   Mohan  v. State of Uttar Pradesh, [1967] I SCR
77,  referred to.



JUDGMENT:
     original Jurisdiction:  Writ  Petition  Nos.  16087  of
1984, 728 of 1981 and 15926 of 1984.
     Under Article 32 of the Constitution of India.
     L.	  N.   Sinha, Mrs.  Shyamla Pappu, Arvind Kumar,  R.
D. Upadhya   and   C.K	 Ratnaparkhi  for the Petitioner  in
W.P.  Nos. 15926/84 & 16087/84.
     K.K.   Venugopal, Arvind  Kumar and  Mrs. Laxmi  Arvind
the Petitioner in WP. No. 728 of 1981. F
     Gopal   Subramaniam   and Mrs.  Shobha Dikshit for	 the
Respondents.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     CHINNAPPA	 REDDY, J.  The petitioners  in the  several
writ petitions	 now  before   us as well as the  appellants
in  Civil Appeal No. 548 of 1982 and the petitioners in Writ
Petition  Nos. 6346- H
114
6351   of 1980 which we dismissed on 11th October, 1984 were
members	  of the Uttar Pradesh Judicial Service in 1980 when
all   of them,	in response  to an advertisement by the High
Court of   Allahabad,  applied to  be  appointed  by  direct
recruitment to	the Uttar  Pradesh  Higher Judicial Service.
They claimed  that each	 of   them had	completed 7 years of
practice at the bar even  before  their appointment  to	 the
Uttar Pradesh  Judicial	  Service   and	   were,  therefore,
eligible to  be appointed  by direct  recruitment  to	 the
Higher Judicial	 Service. As  there was a question about the
eligibility   of  members  of  the  Uttar  Pradesh  Judicial
Service	 to  appointment by direct recruitment to the Higher
Judicial   Service, some of them filed writ petitions in the
Allahabad High	Court the  said petitions were dismissed and
it was	held that  members of  the  Uttar  Pradesh  Judicial
Service were  not  eligible  to	 be    appointed  by  direct
recruitment to	the Uttar  Pradesh Higher Judicial  Service.
Civil Appeal  No. 548 of 1982 was filed in this Court  after
obtaining     special  leave   under   Art.   136   of	 the
Constitution.	By virtue  of the  inter in  order passed by
this Court, members of the Uttar  Pradesh  Judicial Service,
who desired  to	 appear	 at  the examination  and  selection
were allowed  to so   appear,	but   the  result    of	 the
selection was  made subject  to the  outcome   of  the civil
appeal	 and the  writ petitions in this  Court.  The  civil
appeal	 and   some of	the writ petitions were dismissed by
us   on October	 11, 1984.  The remaining writ petitions are
now before  us. Shri   Lal  Narain Sinha  and Shri K.K. Venu
gopal, Learned	 Counsel  who appeared	for the petitioners,
tried to  persuade us  to re-open the  issue, which had been
concluded by  our decision   on	  October  11,	1984. Having
heard them,  we are  not satisfied that there  is any reason
for re-opening	the issue.  When we  dismissed	the    civil
appeal	 and  the writ petitions on the former occasion,  we
were content to merely affirm the judgment of the High Court
of   Allahabad	 without giving	 our own reasons. In view of
the   arguments advanced,  we consider that it may be better
for us	to  indicate briefly our reasons.
     The   submission of  Shri Lal  Narain Sinha  and	Shri
K.K. Venu   gopal   was	 that there  was  no  constitutional
inhibition  against  members  of  any  Subordinate  Judicial
Service seeking to be appointed as District Judges by direct
recruitment provided   they  had completed 7 years' practice
st the	bar. The submission of the learned  counsel was that
members of the	Subordinate  Judiciary, who had
115
     put   in 7	 years' practice  at the bar before  joining
the Subordinate	  A  Judicial Service  and  who	 had  gained
experience     as  Judicial	officers    by	joining	 the
Subordinate  Judicial  Service ought to be considered better
fitted for  appointment as   District  Judges because of the
additional  experience	 gained	 by   them  rather  than  be
penalised for  that reason.  The learned  counsel  submitted
that   a construction  of Art. 233 of the Constitution which
would render   a member of the Subordinate Judicial  Service
ineligible for	 appointment  to the Higher Judicial Service
because	  of   the additional	gained	by him as a Judicial
officer	  would	  be   both unjust   and paradoxical. It was
also suggested that it	would  be extremely  anomalous	if a
member of  the Uttar   Pradesh	Judicial Service who, on the
present	 construction	of  Art.  233  is    ineligible	 for
appointment as	a District  Judge by  direct recruitment, is
nevertheless   eligible	 to be appointed as a judge  of	 the
High Court  by reason of Art. 217(2) (aa.) on the other hand
Sri Gopala  Subramanium, learned  counsel for the respondent
urged  that	there  was    a	 clear	demarcation  in	 the
Constitution between  two   sources of	 recruitment namely:
(1). those  who were  in the  service  of  a State  or Union
and (2).  those who were not in such  service.	He contended
that the  second clause	 of Art. 233 ! was attracted only to
the   second   source and  in respect  of   candidates	from
that source   the  further qualification  of 7	years as  an
advocate  or	 a   pleader	was    made  obligatory	 for
eligibility. According	to  Mr. Gopala	Subramanium, a plain
reading of  both the  clauses of  Art. 233 showed that while
the second  clause of  Art. 233	 was   applicable   only  to
those who  were not  already in	 service,  the	first clause
was applicable	to those  who were  already in	service.  He
urged  that  any other construction would lead to  anomalous
and absurd   consequences  such as  a junior  member of	 the
Subordinate Judicial   Service	taking a  leap, as  it were,
over senior   members  of the  Judicial	 Service  with	long
records of  meritorious service. Both  sides relied upon the
decisions of  this Court  in   Rameshwar Dayal	 v. State of
Punjab(l) and Chander Mohan v. State of	 Uttar Pradesh(2).
     (1) [1961] 2 S.C.R. 874.
     (2) [1967] 1 S.C.R. 77.
116
 Article 233 is as follows:-
     "233(1)   Appointments  of	  persons  to  be,  and	 the
     posting and  promotion of, district judges in any State
     shall be made by the Gover
nor   of the  State in	consultation  with  the	 High  Court
exercising jurisdiction in relation to such State.
     (2)  A   person not already in the service of the Union
     or of  the State shall only be eligible to be appointed
     a district	 judge	 if he	 has  been for not less than
     seven  years   as	an  advocate	or  pleader  and  is
     recommended by the High Court for appointment."
     Two   point straightway  project themselves  when	 the
two clauses of Art. 233 are read:
 The first clause deals with 'appointments of persons to be,
and the	 posting and  promotion of,  district judges  in any
State'	while	the  second   clause  is   confined  in	 its
application to persons	'not already  in  the service of the
Union or  of the  State'.  We  may mention here that Service
of the Union or of the State' has  been interpreted  by this
Court to  mean judicial	 service. Again	  while	 the   first
clause make  consultation by the Governor of the  State with
the High  Court necessary, the second clause  requires	that
the  High Court must recommend a person for appointment as a
District Judge. It is only in respect of the persons covered
by   the second	 clause that  there is	a requirement that a
person shall   be  eligible   for   appointment as  District
Judge if  he   has   been   an advocate or a pleader for not
less than  7 years.  In other	words,	in   the   case	  of
candidates who	are not	 members   of	a   Judicial Service
they must  have been  advocates or  pleaders for   not	less
than   7 years	and they have to be recommended by the	High
Court before   they   may  be appointed	 as District Judges,
while	in   the case	of  candidates who  are members of a
Judicial Service   the	7 years	 rule has no application but
there has  to	be   consultation with	High  Court. A clear
distinction is	made	between	   the	  two  sources	  of
recruitment and	 the  dichotomy	 is  maintained.  The	 two
streams	  are	 separate  until  they	come  together	  by
appointment. Obviously	 the  same slip cannot sail both the
streams	  simultaneously.   The dichotomy is clearly brought
out by	S.K. Das,  J.  in Rameshwar Dayal v. State of Punjab
(supra) where he observes:
117
     "..  Article   233	 is   a	 self	contained  provision
     regarding A   the	 appointment  of District Judges. As
     to a   person   who   is already  in the service of the
     Union or  of the State, no	 special qualifications	 are
     laid down	and under  cl. (1) the Governor	 can appoint
     such a  person as	a district  judge in	consultation
     with the  relevant High  Court.  As  to  a	 person	 not
     already in service, a qualification is laid down in cl.
     (2) and  all that	is required is that  he should be an
     advocate or pleader of seven years'  standing."
Again dealing with the cases of Harbans Singh and Sawhney it
was observed,  "We  consider that even if we proceed on	 the
footing that   both   those  persons were recruited from the
Bar   and   their  appointment	has  to	 be  tested  by	 the
requirements of Clause(2), we must  hold that they fulfilled
those requirements".   Clearly	 the  Court  was  expressing
the   view that it  was	 in  the  case	of recruitment	from
the Bar,  distinguished from   Judicial	  Service  that	 the
requirements of Cl. (2) had to be fulfilled. We may also add
here earlier  the Court	 also expressed	 the view, "...we do
not think that Cl. (2) of Art. 233 can be interpreted in the
light of the Explanation added to Articles 124 and 217."
 In Chandra	 Mohan v.  State of  Uttar  Pradesh  (supra)
Subba Rao,   C.J.  after referring to Articles 233,234, 235,
236 and	 237 stated,- E
     "The   gist   of the  said provisions  may be    stated
thus: Appointments of persons to be, and the posting and pro
motion of, district judges in any State shall be made by the
Governor of the State. There are two sources of recruitment,
namely, (i)   service or  the Union or of the State and (ii)
members of Bar.	 The  said judges  from the first source are
appointed in  consultation   with the  High Court  and those
from the  second source are appointed  on the recommendation
of the	High Court.  But in  the case  of appointments	  of
persons to  the judicial  service other	 than as    district
judges, they  will be  made by	the Governor of the State in
accordance with rules framed by him in consultation with the
High Court  and the  Public Service Commission. But the High
Court has control over	all  the district courts and  courts
subordinate	thereto,  subject   to	certain	  prescribed
limitations."
118
Subba Rao,  CJ.	 then  proceeded  to  consider	whether	 the
Government could  appoint as  district judges  persons	from
services other	than the   judicial  service. After pointing
out that Art. 233(1) was  a declaration of the general power
of the	Governor in  the matter	 of appointment	 of district
judges and  he did  not lay down the qualifications  of	 the
candidates to  be   appointed  or  denoted  the sources from
which the recruitment had to be made, he proceeded to state,
     "But the  sources of  recruitment are  indicated in cl.
     (2) thereof.   Under cl. (2 of Are. 233 two sources are
     given   namely,   (i) persons   in	  the service of the
     Union or of the State,  and  (ii) advocate or pleader."
     Posing    the  question  whether  the  expression	"the
service of   the Union or of the State" meant any service of
the Union   or	of   the   State or  whether  it  meant	 the
judicial   service   of	  the Union   or   of the State, the
learned	 Chief	   Justice     emphatically  held  that	 the
expression "the	 service" in  Art. 233(2)  could   only mean
the   judicial service.	 But he did not mean  by  the  above
statement   that persons   who	are already in the  service,
on   the recommendation	 by  the High Court can be appointed
as   District Judges,  overlooking the	claims of  all other
Seniors in the Subordinate Judiciary Contrary to Art. 14 and
Art. 16 of the Constitution.
     Thus   we	 see that  the two decisions do not  support
the contention	 advanced  on behalf of the petitioners but,
to   the extent	  that	they  go, they certainly advance the
case   of   the respondents.  We therefore, see no reason to
depart from  the   view	 already    taken    by	 us  and  we
accordingly dismiss the	 writ  petitions.
H.S.K.					Petitions dismissed.
119




