

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Radhey Shyam Etc. Etc vs Kalyan Mal on 10 October, 1984Equivalent citations: 1985 AIR  139, 1985 SCR  (1) 945
Author: A Varadarajan
Bench: Varadarajan, A. (J)
           PETITIONER:
RADHEY SHYAM ETC. ETC.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
KALYAN MAL

DATE OF JUDGMENT10/10/1984

BENCH:
VARADARAJAN, A. (J)
BENCH:
VARADARAJAN, A. (J)
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)

CITATION:
 1985 AIR  139		  1985 SCR  (1) 945
 1984 SCC  (4) 447	  1984 SCALE  (2)641


ACT:
     Madhya Pradesh  Accommodation Control Act, 1961-Section
12 (1)	(f) and (h)- An order made in eviction proceeding in
which  landlord	  established  that   he  bonafide  required
premises for  his occupation is one under section 12 (1) (f)
and not under section 12 (1) (h).



HEADNOTE:
     The  respondent-landlord	sought	 eviction   of	 the
appellants-tenants  under  section  12	(1)  of	 the  Madhya
Pradesh Accommodation  Control Act,  1961 on the main ground
that  the   landlord  bonafide	required  the  premises	 for
locating  his	gold  and  silver  ornaments  factory  after
demolishing and	 reconstructing	 the  building.	 The  courts
below  found  that  the	 requirement  of  the  landlord	 was
bonafide and  ordered eviction	of the tenants under section
12 (l)	(f) and (h) of the Act. In these appeals the tenants
contended that	since the eviction ordered was under section
12 (l)	(h), section  18 of the Act was attracted and it was
obligatory  on	 the  part   of	 the   landlord	 to  provide
accommodation of  equal extent	to the	tenants in  the	 new
building to be constructed by him.
     Dismissing the appeals,
^
     HELD: In  Ramnilal P. Mehta v. Indradaman Amritlal this
Court observed	that once  the landlord	 establishes that he
bonafide requires  the premises	 for his  occupation, he  is
entitled to  recover possession	 of it from the tenant under
the provisions	of sub-clause  (g) of  section 13 (1) of the
Bombay Rents,  Hotel and  Lodging House.  Rates Control Act,
1947 irrespective  of the  fact whether	 he would occupy the
premises without  making any alterations or after making tho
necessary alterations. [948B-C]
     Ramnilal P.  Mehta v.  Indradaman Amritlal	 Sheth,	 AIR
1964 SC 1676, referred to.
     Section 13	 (1) (g)  of the  Bombay  Rents,  Hotel	 and
Lodging	 House,	 Rates	Control	 Act,  1947  corresponds  to
section 12  (1) (f)  of	 tho  Madhya  Pradesh  Accommodation
Control Act. [948A]
     Applying the  above  principle  to	 the  facts  of	 the
instant case,  though the Courts below have passed the order
of eviction under section 12 (1) (f) and (h) the Court is of
the opinion  that the  order of eviction is based really and
substan-
946
tially only  under section  12 (1)  (f) of the Act. The fact
that section  12 (1)  (h) is  also mentioned in the order of
the Court  below does  not make the order of eviction purely
one under  that section,  for the main ground of requirement
of  the	  landlord  is	bonafide  personal  requirement	 for
locating his proposed factory for the manufacture of gold or
silver	ornaments.  Therefore  there  is  no  case  for	 the
application of	section 18 to the facts of the present case.
[947F-G]



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal Nos. 750-53
of 1982.
     Appeal by	special leave  from the	 Judgment and  order
dated the  3rd September,  1981 of  the Madhya	Pradesh High
Court in S.A. Nos. 249, 251-253 of 1980.
			    WlTH
	       Civil Appeal No. 3357 of 1982.
     Appeal by	special leave  from the	 Judgment and  order
dated the 24th August, 1982 of the Madhya Pradesh High Court
in Second Appeal No. 311 of 1982.
     A.K. Sen,	R.P. Singh Suman Kapoor. D.S. Mehra and R.K.
Jain, tor the Appellants in C.A s. 750-53 of 1982.
     P.K. Jain, for the Appellants in CA. 3357/82.
     U.R. Lalit.  Mrs. Suneeta	Kriplani, Ashok	 Mahajan and
S.K. Gambhir for the Respondent.
     The Judgment of the court was delivered by
     VARDARAJAN, J.  These appeals  by special	leave are by
the tenants  whose eviction  has been  ordered	by  all	 the
courts below  under section 12 (1) (f) and (h) of the Madhya
Pradesh Accommodation  Control Act,  1961 on the ground that
the respondent	landlord requires  the premises bonafide for
the purpose  of having his gold and silver ornaments factory
after demolishing  the present building and putting up a new
building at  the place. The tenants were carrying on various
kinds of  business in  the premises.  Their defence was that
the landlord  has other	 alternative accommodation  where he
could locate  his proposed  factory and that his requirement
is not	bonafide. The  courts  below  have  found  that	 the
alternative accommodation  alleged by  the appellants  to be
available to  the landlord  is really  a farm house which is
used for  the residential  purpose, namely  as accommodation
for the farm servants of the
947
landlord and  it is situated about these miles away from the
town and  near a burial ground in a lonely place and that it
is also	 not a	suitable  place	 where	a  factory  for	 the
manufacture of gold and silver ornaments could be carried on
without risk  to life and property. As regards the ground of
bonafide requirement,  the courts  below have found that the
requirement of	the  landlord  is  bonafide  and  they	have
ordered eviction  of the appellants under section 12 (1) (f)
(h) of the Act.
     Mr.  A.K.	Sen,  learned  counsel	for  the  appellants
contended  before   us	that  alternative  accommodation  is
available and  that it is not possible to accept the finding
of the	courts below  that it  is not  suitable. After going
through the  judgment of the first Appellate Court which has
dealt with  this question  in depth we agree with the courts
below that  the	 alternative  accommodation  alleged  to  be
available to  the landlord  is really a farm house where the
farm servants  of the  landlord are accommodated and that it
is not	suitable for  the purpose  for	which  the  landlord
requires accommodation.
     Mr. Sen  submitted that  the eviction  ordered is under
section 12 (1) (h) of the Act and that section is of the Act
is attracted  and it  is  obligatory  on  the  part  of	 the
landlord to  provide accommodation  of equal  extent to	 the
tenants in  the new  building to  be constructed by him. The
first Appellate	 Court has observed in its judgment that the
order of  eviction is  sought on  the  main  ground  of	 the
bonafide requirement  of the landlord. Therefore there is no
case for  the application  of section 18 to the facts of the
present case.  Though the courts below have passed the order
of eviction  under section  12 (l) (f) and (h) we are of the
opinion that  the order	 of eviction  is  based	 really	 and
substantially only  under section 12 (1) (f) of the Act. The
fact that section 1 2(1) (h) is also mentioned in the orders
of the	courts below  does not	make the  order of  eviction
purely one  under that	section,  for  the  main  ground  of
requirement of the landlord is bonafide personal requirement
for locating  his proposed  factory for	 the manufacture  of
gold and  silver ornaments.  A case  more or less similar on
facts had  come up before this Court in Ramnilal P. Mehta v.
Indradaman Amritlal Sheth which arose from proceedings taken
under the  Bombay Rents,  Hotel	 and  Lodging  House,  Rates
Control Act  (57 of  1947). There  the eviction	 was  sought
under section 13(1) (g) and 13 (1) (hh) of that Act.
948
Section 13(1)  (g) of that Act corresponds to section 12 (1)
(f) of	the Madhya  Pradesh Accommodation  Control  Act	 and
Section 13(1) (hh) of that Act corresponds to section 12 (1)
(g) namely  that the  building	is  required  for  effecting
either repairs	or alterations.	 This Court  has observed in
that  case  that  once	the  landlord  establishes  that  he
bonafide requires  the premises	 for his  occupation, he  is
entitled to  recover possession	 of it from the tenant under
the  provisions	 of  sub-clause	 (g)  of  section  (13)	 (1)
irrespective  of  the  fact  whether  he  would	 occupy	 the
premises without  making any alterations or after making the
necessary alterations.
     Though the facts of that case are slightly different in
that the  requirement was  for occupation  after making some
alterations where  as in the present case the requirement is
for locating  the landlord's  factory after  demolishing and
re-constructing the  building, the  principle deducible from
that decision  would apply  to the facts of even these case.
We agree  with Mr.  U.R.  Lalit,  learned  counsel  for	 the
respondent landlord  that the  order of	 eviction  is  based
mainly under  section 12(1) (f) of the Act and that from the
mere fact that section 12(1)(h) also is added would not make
the order of eviction only one under section 12(1)(h) of the
Act and	 section 18  of the  Act will not be attracted. This
fact was  not raised  in the  courts. below,  perhaps due to
proper undertaking  of this  position. For these reasons the
appeals fail  and are  dismissed but under the circumstances
of the case without costs.
H.S.K.	  Appeal dismissed.
949
