

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Diwakar Shrivastava And Ors vs State Of Madhya Pradesh And Ors on 2 February, 1984Equivalent citations: 1984 AIR  468, 1984 SCR  (2) 792
Author: O C Reddy
Bench: Reddy, O. Chinnappa (J)
           PETITIONER:
DIWAKAR SHRIVASTAVA AND ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH AND ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT02/02/1984

BENCH:
REDDY, O. CHINNAPPA (J)
BENCH:
REDDY, O. CHINNAPPA (J)
VENKATARAMIAH, E.S. (J)
MISRA, R.B. (J)

CITATION:
 1984 AIR  468		  1984 SCR  (2) 792
 1984 SCALE  (1)141


ACT:
     Civil Procedure-Persons  likely to	 be affected must be
impleaded as parties.
     Natural Justice-Applicability of.



HEADNOTE:
     The appellants  questioned the  relaxation	 granted  to
candidates  belonging  to  Scheduled  Castes  and  Scheduled
Tribes	in  regard  to	the  minimum  qualifying  marks	 for
admission  into	  the  medical	 colleges  without  properly
impleading the persons who were likely to be affected if the
submissions of the appellants were accepted.
     Dismissing the appeals,
^
     HELD:  Rules  of  natural	justice	 apply	as  much  to
proceedings in	courts	of  law	 as  to	 proceedings  before
authorities elsewhere.	It  may	 be  that  where  a  general
question is  involved and  a large  number  of	persons	 are
concerned, the court may, in appropriate cases, permit a few
of them	 to be	sued in	 a representative  capacity  or	 may
consider them  as sufficiently represented by a few who have
been properly impleaded as parties. [793F-G]
     In the  instant case no effort has been made to implead
any  person  likely  to	 be  affected  as  a  party  to	 the
proceedings. The question of the legality or validity of the
relaxation  granted  in	 their	favour	cannot	possibly  be
decided in their absence. [793G; F]



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION : Civil Appeal Nos, 6407-
6408 of 1983.
     Appeals by	 Special leave	from the  Judgment and order
dated the  17th March, 1983 of the Madhya Pradesh High Court
in Misc Petition Nos. 1232 and 1604 of 1982.
			    WITH
	     Civil Appeal Nos. 8201-04 of 1983.
     Appeals by	 Special leave	from the  Judgment and order
dated the 22nd August, 1983 of the Madhya Pradesh High Court
in Misc. Petitions Nos. 1876, 1908, 1909 and 1976 of 1983.
793
			    AND
	       Civil Appeal No. 8200 of 1983.
     Appeal by	Special leave  from the	 Judgment and  order
dated the  6th September,  1983 of  the Madhya	Pradesh High
Court in Misc. Petition No. 2140 of 1983.
     Shiv Dayal, G. L. Sanghi, Mukul Mudgal and J. P. Sanghi
for the Appellants.
 A. K.  Sanghi, S.	R. Agawala  and V.  K Chitre for the
Respondents.
     C. L. Sahu for the Intervener Madanlal.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     CHINNAPPA REDDY,  J.  The	appellants  in	the  several
appeals	 before	  us  question	the  relaxation	 granted  to
candidates  belonging	to  the	 Scheduled  Castes  and	 the
Scheduled Tribes  in regard  to the minimum qualifying marks
for admission  into the	 medical colleges  of the  State  of
Madhya Pradesh.	 We are	 afraid we  have to  throw out these
appeals on the preliminary ground that the persons likely to
be affected  if we agree with the submissions made on behalf
of the	appellants, that is, the candidates belonging tot he
Scheduled Castes  and the  Scheduled Tribes who have secured
admission into	the medical  colleges as  a  result  of	 the
relaxation granted  to them  have not been brought before us
by being  properly impleaded  as parties. We fail to see how
the question  of the  legality or validity of the relaxation
granted in  their favour  can possibly	be decided  in their
absence.  Rules	  of  natural	justice	 apply	as  much  to
proceedings in	courts	of  law	 as  to	 proceedings  before
authorities elsewhere.	It  may	 be  that  where  a  general
question is  involved and  a large  number  of	persons	 are
concerned, the court may, in appropriate cases, permit a few
of them	 to be	sued in	 a representative  capacity  or	 may
consider them  as sufficiently represented by a few who have
been  properly	 impleaded  as	parties.  That	is  not	 the
situation here.	 No effort  has been  made  to	implead	 any
person likely  to be  affected as a party to the proceeding.
All the	 appeals are  liable to	 be dismissed  on this short
ground.
     The learned  counsel for the appellants urged that some
seats reserved	for the	 Scheduled Castes  and the Scheduled
Tribes which  have  not	 been  filled  on  account  of	non-
availability of candidates.
794
have to	 be transferred	 to the	 general category  under the
rules and  are, therefore,  available for  candidates coming
under the  general category.  The counsel for the appellants
suggests that  the several  appellants may  be	accommodated
against these vacancies and directed to be admitted into one
or other  of the  medical colleges.  So far  as admission to
medical colleges  for the  year 1982-83	 is concerned, it is
stated in  the additional  counter-affidavit filed on behalf
of the	first respondent  that all the seats including those
transferred  from  the	reserved  category  to	the  general
category have  been filled  and there are no more vacancies.
It is, therefore, unnecessary to give any direction in Civil
Appeal Nos.  6407 and 6408 which relate to the year 1982-83.
The other appeals relate to admissions during the year 1983-
84. In	these cases,  we have  no definite information as to
the number of vacancies available. Even if there are a large
number of  vacancies, we  cannot give any direction to admit
the appellants against those vacancies since we are not in a
position to say that appellants are the best candidates from
the general  category. All  that we can do is to say that if
on  account   of  non-availabity   of  candidates  from	 the
Scheduled Castes  and the  Scheduled Tribes,  there are	 any
vacancies which	 are  required	to  be	transferred  to	 the
general category  under the  rules, such  vacancies  may  be
filled up  from the  general category on the basis of merit.
We do  not have any doubt that this will be done. Subject to
this direction, the appeals are dismissed.
H.S.K.					  Appeals dismissed.
795




