

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Sebastian M. Hongray vs Union Of India & Ors on 23 April, 1984Equivalent citations: 1984 AIR 1026, 1984 SCR  (3) 544
Author: D Desai
Bench: Desai, D.A.
           PETITIONER:
SEBASTIAN M. HONGRAY

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
UNION OF INDIA & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT23/04/1984

BENCH:
DESAI, D.A.
BENCH:
DESAI, D.A.
REDDY, O. CHINNAPPA (J)

CITATION:
 1984 AIR 1026		  1984 SCR  (3) 544
 1984 SCC  (3)	82	  1984 SCALE  (1)629
 CITATOR INFO :
 F	    1986 SC 494	 (3)


ACT:
     Writ of  Habeas Corpus  served on Respondents directing
them to	 produce the  two named	 persons-Respondents fail to
file a	return but  explain the	 reasons for  not  producing
them-Appropriate mode  of enforcing  obedience to  a Writ of
Habeas	Corpus,	  explained-Contempt  of   Court  Act,	1971
Sections 2  (a) and  2 (b)  "civil contempt"  and willful di
obedience", explained  Exemplary Cost by way of Compensation
ordered under  Rule 6 of order XLVII of Supreme Court Rules,
1966.



HEADNOTE:
     On November  24, 1983,  the Court	by its	judgment and
order directed that a writ of Habeas Corpus be issued-Though
the 1st, 2nd and 4th respondents were served, they failed to
file a	return to the Writ. However a return on affidavit by
one Ajai  Vikram Singh	Director, Ministry  of	Defence	 was
filed on  12.12.1983 expressing	 their inability  to produce
the two	 named officers	 due to	 circumstances beyond  their
control and  their failure  to	trace  them  even  with	 the
assistance of  Central Bureau  of  Investigation.  This	 was
supported by  a copy  of the  report by	 the  Dy.  Inspector
General of Police (s).
     Making the Rule absolute the Court,
^
     HELD 1.  In compliance  with  the	mandatory  direction
contained in  the Writ	of Habeas Corpus, the person to whom
it is  directed is  under a  legal obligation to produce the
body of	 the person alleged to be unlawfully detained before
the Court  on the  day specified and to make a formal return
to the writ. Here, such a writ has been issued and there has
been failure  to produce  the missing  persons in respect of
whom writ  is issued  and to  file the return as mandated by
law. [547E-F]
     2:1 The  Contempt of Courts Act, 1971 defines 'contempt
of court'  in Sec.  2(a) to mean 'civil contempt or criminal
contempt'. 'Civil  contempt' is defined in Sec. 2(b) to mean
willful disobedience  to  any  judgment	 decree,  direction,
order, writ or other process of a Court or willful breach of
an undertaking	given to a Court'. Willful disobedience to a
writ issued  by the Court constitutes civil contempt. [547H;
548A]
     2:2 Mere  failure to  obey the  writ may not constitute
civil contempt depending upon the facts and circumstances of
the case.  But willful	disobedience to	 a writ	 issued by a
Court constitutes  civil contempt.  Again it is well settled
that the  appropriate mode  of enforcing obedience to a writ
of habeas  corpus is  by committal for contempt. A committal
order may be
545
made against a person who intentionally makes a false return
to  a	writ  of   habeas  corpus,   but  an   unintentional
misrepresentation on a return is not a ground for committal.
[548B-C]
     2:3 The  view of  this Court  as expressed	 in the main
judgment clearly indicates that the assertion of respondents
1, 2  and 4  that C.  Daniel and  C. Paul left Phungrei Camp
where 21st  Sikh Regiment  were stationed is not correct and
that to	 avoid responsibility  flowing from  the  mysterious
disappearance of  C. Daniel  and C. Paul an attempt was made
to suggest  that they had left alive in the company of their
compatriots. On	 that conclusion one can say that there is a
willful	 disobedience  to  the	writ  of  habeas  corpus  by
misleading the	court by  presenting a	distorted version of
facts not  borne out  by the  record. It is thus established
that the  respondents  1,  2  and  4  have  committed  civil
contempt by their willful disobedience to the writ. [548D-E]
     3:1 Civil	contempt is  punishable with imprisonment as
well as	 fine. In  a given case, the court may also penalise
the party  in contempt	by ordering  him to pay the costs of
the application.  A  fine  can	also  be  imposed  upon	 the
contemnor. [548F]
     3:2 In the facts and circumstances of the case, keeping
in view	 the torture,  the agony  and the  mental oppression
through which  Mrs. C.	Thingkhuila, wife  of Shri C. Daniel
and Mrs.  C. Vangamla,	wife of Shri C. Paul had to pass and
they being  the proper	applicants, the	 formal	 application
being by.  Sebastion M.	 Hongray, the  court  considered  it
proper and  directed that as a measure of exemplary costs as
is permissible in such cases, respondents Nos. 1 and 2 shall
pay Rs. 1 lac to each of the aforementioned two women within
a period of four weeks from April 23, 1984.
					      [548G-H; 549A]
     4.	 Further   adjourning  the   matter  to	 enable	 the
respondents to trace or locate the two missing persons is to
shut the eyes to the reality and to peruse a mirage. The two
officers have not met their tragic end in an encounter as is
usually claimed	 and the only possible inference that can be
drawn from  circumstance of  the case  is that	both of them
must have  met an  unnatural death. Prima facie, it would be
an offence  of murder.	Who is	individually or collectively
the perpetrator	 of the	 crime or  is responsible  for their
disappearance will  have  to  be  determined  by  a  proper,
thorough and  responsible police  investigation. It  is	 not
necessary  to  start  casting  a  doubt	 on  anyone  or	 any
particular person.  But prima  facie there  is	material  on
record to  reach an affirmative conclusion that both Shri C.
Daniel and  Shri C.  Paul are  not alive  and  have  met  an
unnatural death.  And the  Union of  India cannot disown the
responsibility in this behalf. [549B-E]
     (The  Court   issued  a   writ  of	  mandamus  to	 the
Superintendent of Police, Ukhrul, Manipur State to treat all
the papers in the Writ of Habeas Corpus as "information of a
cognizable  offence   and  to	commence  investigation	 as"
prescribed  by	the  relevant  provisions  of  the  Code  of
Criminal Procedure.)
						    [549E-F]
546



JUDGMENT:
     ORIGINAL JURISDICTION  : Writ  Petition (Criminal)	 No.
148 of 1983.
      (Under article 32 of the Constitution of India)
     Ms.  Nandita  Haksar  and	C.S.  Vaidyanathan  for	 the
     Petitioner. Ms. A. Subhashini for Respondent.
     Mrs. Urmila Kapoor for Respondent.
     V.C. Mahajan,  P.N. Puri  S.K. Mehta  and Balbir  Singh
Shant for Respondent.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     DESAI, J.	On Nov.	 24, 1983, the Court by its Judgment
and order  directed that  a writ of habeas corpus be issued.
The operative portion of the order reads as under:
	  "Accordingly, this  petition	is  allowed  and  we
     direct that  a writ  of habeas  corpus be issued to the
     respondents 1,  2 and  4 commanding  them to produce C.
     Daniel, retired  Naik Subedar  of	Manipur	 Rifles	 and
     Headmaster of the Junior High School of Huining Village
     and  C.  Paul,  Assistant	Pastor	of  Huining  Baptist
     Church, who  were taken  to Phungrei Camp by the jawans
     of 21st  Sikh Regiment  on March  10, 1982	 before this
     Court on Dec. 12, 1983 and file the return."
     The Registry  issued the  writ and served the same upon
first  respondent-Union	  of   India,	second	 respondent-
Secretary, Ministry  of Home  Affairs  and  4th	 respondent-
Commandant, 21st  Sikh Regiment,  Phungrei Camp. Pursuant to
the writ,  it was  obligatory upon respondents 1, 2 and 4 to
file the  return and  to produce  C. Daniel  and C.  Paul. A
return on  affidavit by	 one Ajai  Vikram  Singh,  Director,
Ministry of  Defence dated  December 9, 1983 was produced in
the Court  on December	12, 1983  stating therein "that with
all the	 will and  the best  efforts,  the  respondents	 are
unable to  produce S/Shri  C. Daniel  and C.  Paul  for	 the
reasons set out in the affidavit and crave for indulgence of
the Hon'ble  Court for their inability to produce the above-
named  individuals   due  to   circumstances  beyond   their
control." It  was reiterated that C. Daniel and C. Paul were
not in the custody or control of respondents 1, 2, and 4. To
this return several affidavits and messages were
547
annexed	 saying	 that  the  Army  authorities  conducted  an
extensive search  for tracing  C. Daniel  and  C.  Paul	 but
nothing fruitful  has been  achieved.  One  Surendra  Kumar,
Deputy Secretary,  Ministry of	Home Affairs  had also filed
the return stating that C. Daniel and C. Paul are neither in
the custody  or control	 of respondent	No. 2. It was stated
that Central  Bureau of	 Investigation (CBI  for short) have
been  directed	 to  conduct   enquiries   to	locate	 the
aforementioned	two  persons  and  to  intimate	 the  result
thereof. The  matter was adjourned to enable the respondents
to pursue  their efforts.  Nothing  fruitful  came  up	even
though the  matter was	twice adjourned	 at the	 request  of
learned Attorney General who entered appearance on behalf of
respondents Nos.  1, 2	and 4.	The writ petition was posted
for further  hearing and  orders on  April 19, 1984. On that
day, a	summary of  enquiry made by CBI was submitted to the
Court in  which it was stated that 'the field enquiries made
by the	CBI and	 the efforts  made to locate the two persons
have yielded  no results  and it  has not  been possible  to
locate Sri Daniel and Sri Paul', The report was submitted by
the Dy. Inspector General of Police (S).
     It is  now	 necessary  to	deal  with  the	 failure  of
respondents 1,	2 and  4 to  file the  return to the writ of
habeas corpus. After a preliminary enquiry and after hearing
the respondents	 and after negativing their contentions that
Shri C.	 Daniel and Shri C. Paul were not seen last alive in
the custody  of the  4th respondent,  the Court	 directed to
issue a writ of habeas corpus. The writ of habeas corpus was
issued and  was	 served	 on  respondents  1,  2	 and  4.  In
compliance with	 the mandatory	direction contained  in	 the
writ of	 habeas corpus, the person to whom it is directed is
under a	 legal obligation  to produce  the  body  of  person
alleged to  be unlawfully  detained before  the Court on the
day specified  and to  make a formal return to the writ. (1)
Such a	writ has  been issued  and there has been failure to
produce the  missing persons  in respect  of  whom  writ  is
issued and to file the return as mandated by law.
     The  next	 question  therefore,	is  :  what  is	 the
appropriate mode  of enforcing obedience to a writ of habeas
corpus ?
 The Contempt  of Courts  Act, 1971 defines 'contempt of
court' in  Sec. 2(a)  to mean  'civil contempt	or  criminal
contempt'. 'Civil con
548
tempt' is  defined in  Sec. 2(b) to mean wilful disobedience
to any	judgment decree,  direction, order,  writ  or  other
process of  a Court or wilful breach of an undertaking given
to a  Court.' Wilful  disobedience to  a writ  issued by the
Court constitutes  civil contempt. The question is : whether
this disobedience  is wilful ? Mere failure to obey the writ
may not	 constitute civil  contempt depending upon the facts
and circumstances  of the case. But wilful disobedience to a
writ issued  by a Court constitutes civil contempt. Again it
is well-settled	 that 'the  appropriate	 mode  of  enforcing
obedience to  a writ  of habeas	 corpus is  by committal for
contempt. A committal order may be made against a person who
intentionally makes  a false  return to	 a  writ  of  habeas
corpus, but  an unintentional  misrepresentation on a return
is not a ground for committal.'(1)
     The view  of  this	 Court	as  expressed  in  the	main
judgment clearly indicates that the assertion of respondents
1, 2  and 4  that C.  Daniel and  C. Paul left Phungrei Camp
where 21st  Sikh Regiment  were stationed is not correct and
that to	 avoid responsibility  flowing from  the  mysterious
disappearance of  C. Daniel  and C. Paul an attempt was made
to suggest  that they had left alive in the company of their
compatriots. The  Court	 has  rejected	this  submission  as
untenable and uncorrect. On that conclusion one can say that
there is  a wilful disobedience to the writ of habeas corpus
by misleading the court by presenting a distorted version of
facts not  borne out  by the  record. It is thus established
that the  respondents  1,  2  and  4  have  committed  civil
contempt by their wilful disobedience to the writ.
     Civil contempt  is punishable with imprisonment as well
as fine.  In a	given case,  the court may also penalise the
party in  contempt by  ordering him  to pay the costs of the
application. (2)  A  fine  can	also  be  imposed  upon	 the
contemnor.
     Now in  the facts	and circumstances of the case, we do
not propose  to impose imprisonment nor any amount as and by
way of	fine but  keeping in view the torture, the agony and
the mental  oppression through	which Mrs.  C.	Thingkhuila,
wife of Shri C. Daniel and Mrs. C. Vangamla, wife of Shri C.
Paul had  to pass  and they being the proper applicants, the
formal application  being by Sebastian M. Hongray, we direct
that as a measure of exem-
549
plary costs  as is  permissible in  such cases,	 respondents
Nos.  1	  and  2   shall  pay  Rs  1  lac  to  each  of	 the
aforementioned two  women within a period of four weeks from
today.
     A query was posed to the learned Attorney General about
the further step to be taken. It was made clear that further
adjourning the	matter to enable the respondents to trace or
locate the  two missing	 persons is  to shut the eyes to the
reality and to pursue a mirage. As we are inclined to direct
registration of	 an offence and an investigation, we express
no opinion  as to  what fate  has befallen to Shri C. Daniel
and Shri C. Paul, the missing two persons in respect of whom
the writ  of habeas corpus was issued save and except saying
that they  have not  met their tragic end in an encounter as
is usually  claimed and the only possible inference that can
be drawn from circumstance already discussed is that both of
them must have met an unnatural death. Prima facie, it would
be an offence of murder. Who is individually or collectively
the perpetrator	 of the	 crime or  is responsible  for their
disappearance will  have  to  be  determined  by  a  proper,
thorough and  responsible police  investigation. It  is	 not
necessary  to  start  casting  a  doubt	 on  anyone  or	 any
particular person.  But prima  facie there  is	material  on
record to  reach an affirmative conclusion that both Shri C.
Daniel and  Shri C.  Paul are  not alive  and  have  met  an
unnatural death.  And the  Union of  India cannot disown the
responsibility	in   this  behalf.   If	 this  inference  is
permissible which  we consider	reasonable in  the facts and
circumstances of  the case,  we direct	that  the  Registrar
(Judicial)  shall   forward  all  the  papers  of  the	case
accompanied by	a writ	of mandamus to the Superintendent of
Police, Ukhrul,	 Manipur State	to be treated as information
of a  cognizable offence  and to  commence investigation  as
prescribed  by	the  relevant  provisions  of  the  Code  of
Criminal Procedure.
S.R.					 Rule made absolute.
550




