

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Banwar Lal vs State Of Rajasthan on 27 September, 1984Equivalent citations: 1985 AIR  336, 1985 SCR  (1) 859
Author: Y Chandrachud
Bench: Chandrachud, Y.V. ((Cj)
           PETITIONER:
BANWAR LAL

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF RAJASTHAN

DATE OF JUDGMENT27/09/1984

BENCH:
CHANDRACHUD, Y.V. ((CJ)
BENCH:
CHANDRACHUD, Y.V. ((CJ)
DESAI, D.A.
THAKKAR, M.P. (J)

CITATION:
 1985 AIR  336		  1985 SCR  (1) 859
 1984 SCC  Supl.  538	  1984 SCALE  (2)787


ACT:
     The Supreme  Court (Enlargement  of Criminal  Appellate
Jurisdiction) Act  1970 Section Z (a)-Duty of Supreme Court-
Appreciation of	 evidence-Evidence  of	Independent  witness
corroborated  by   his	identifying   the  accused   in	  an
identification parade  and recovery  of	 the  blood  stained
baniyan worn  by the  accused and  the blood  stained knife,
value.



HEADNOTE:
     The appellant  along with	Kanahiya Lal,  Ram Niwas and
Badri Lal was charged under Section 302 read with Section 34
Indian Penal Code and tried for the offence of murder of one
Gyanchand by  the Sessions  Judge, Bhilwara,  Rajasthan. The
learned Judge  convicted and sentenced Kanahiya Lal alone to
life imprisonment  and acquitted  the rest.  In appeal,	 the
High Court  of Rajasthan, while confirming the conviction of
Kanahiya Lal  as also  the acquittal of two out of the three
persons, convicted  and sentenced the appellant also to life
imprisonment. Hence  the  appeal  under	 the  Supreme  Court
Enlargement of Criminal Appellate Jurisdiction Act, 1970.
     Dismissing the appeal, the Court,
^
     HELD: Since  the High  Court  set	aside  an  order  of
acquittal and  sentenced the  appellant to life imprisonment
it is  necessary for  the Supreme  Court to consider whether
two views  of  the  evidence  are  reasonably  possible	 and
whether, the  High Court  was justified in setting aside the
order of  acquittal passed  by the  trial Court in favour of
the  appellant.	 Approaching  the  case	 and  assessing	 the
evidence from  that point  of view,  it is  clear, that	 the
conviction of  the appellant in view of the evidence of Bodu
Lal as	corroborated by	 the discovery	of the blood stained
baniyan and  knife is unassailable. He is an independent and
the most  important witness  in	 whose	cycle  rickshaw	 the
appellant and  the co-accused Kanhiya Lal travelled from the
hotel of  Shankar Maharaj  to the scene of offence. Bodu Lal
identified the	appellant in  the identification  parade and
his evidence  as to  the  colour  of  baniyan  worn  by	 the
appellant at  the time	of the incident tallied with that of
the one	 stained with  human blood  and recovered  from	 the
accused. A  knife stained  with human  blood also  recovered
from his person confirmed his guilt. [860E-F, 861-B-C]
860



JUDGMENT:
     CRIMINAL APPELLATE	 JURISDICTION: Criminal	 Appeal	 No.
224 of 1974.
     From  the	Judgment  and  Order  Dated  8.1.73  of	 the
Rajasthan High Court in Criminal Appeal No. 776 of 1970.
     Naunit Lal & Kailash Vasdev. for the appellant.
     B.D. Sharma for the respondent.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     CHANDRACHUD,  C.J.	 Four  persons	were  tried  by	 the
learned Sessions  Judge, Bhilwara,  under section  302	read
with section  34  of  the  Penal  Code.	 The  learned  Judge
acquitted three	 out of	 the four accused and convicted only
one of	them,  namely,	Kanahiya  Lal.	The  High  Court  of
Rajasthan confirmed  the conviction of Kanahiya Lal, as also
the acquittal  of two  out of  the three  persons  who	were
acquitted by  the Sessions  Judge. The	High Court, however,
set aside  the acquittal  of the  appellant,  convicted	 him
under section 302 read with section 34 of the Penal Code and
sentenced him to life imprisonment.
     Since  the	 High  Court  has  set	aside  an  order  of
acquittal  and	 has  sentenced	  the  appellant   to	life
imprisonment, it  is necessary to consider whether two views
of the	evidence are  reasonably possible  and whether,	 the
High Court  was justified  in setting  aside  the  order  of
acquittal passed  by  the  trial  Court	 in  favour  of	 the
appellant. Having  approached  the  case  and  assessed	 the
evidence from that point of view, we are of the opinion that
it is  impossible to  agree with the view taken by the trial
court. The  High Court	has specifically  dealt with reasons
given by  the  trial  court  in	 support  of  the  order  of
acquittal and  has demonstrated	 in a good measure as to why
those reasons  cannot be  accepted. We	concur in  the	High
Court's appreciation of evidence.
     The  incident   out  of  which  the  prosecution  arose
happened at  about 8  p.m. On September 29, 1968 at Bhilwara
Rajasthan, leading to the death of one Gyanchand. The motive
for the	 offence is  alleged to be that Gyanchand's brother,
Nemi Chand,  owed money	 to accused  Nos. 3 and 4, Ram Niwas
and Badri  Lal. Nemi Chand was evading to pay the debt which
created bitterness  between the two brothers on one hand and
accused Nos.  3 and  4 on  the	other.	The  latter,  it  is
alleged, procured  the help of the appellant and of Kanahiya
Lal in doing Gyanchand to death.
861
     The prosecution  examined a few witnesses in support of
its   case but it is unnecessary to refer to the evidence of
each one  of them. The most important witness in the case is
Bodu Lal  (P.W. 2).  He is  an independent witness, in whose
cycle rickshaw the appellant and the co-accused Kanahiya Lal
travelled from	the hotel of Shankar Maharaj to the scene of
offence.  Bodu	 Lal  identified   the	appellant   in	 the
identification	parade.	  According  to	 his  evidence,	 the
appellant was  wearing a  yellow baniyan  at the time of the
incident. When	the appellant was arrested. a yellow baniyan
was found on his person and it was stained with human blood.
A knife stained with human blood was also recovered from his
person.
     The High  Court has  convicted the appellant relying on
the evidence  of Bodu  Lal, as corroborated by the discovery
of the	blood stained baniyan and knife. This evidence seems
to us  unassailable. Accordingly, we dismiss this appeal and
confirm the judgment of the High Court.
S.R.	  Appeal dismissed.
862
