

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Gwalior District Co-Operatlve ... vs Ramesh Chandra Mangal And Ors on 26 September, 1984Equivalent citations: 1985 AIR  337, 1985 SCR  (1) 856
Author: Y Chandrachud
Bench: Chandrachud, Y.V. ((Cj)
           PETITIONER:
GWALIOR DISTRICT CO-OPERATlVE CENTRAL BANK LTD. GWALIOR

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
RAMESH CHANDRA MANGAL AND ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT26/09/1984

BENCH:
CHANDRACHUD, Y.V. ((CJ)
BENCH:
CHANDRACHUD, Y.V. ((CJ)
DESAI, D.A.
THAKKAR, M.P. (J)

CITATION:
 1985 AIR  337		  1985 SCR  (1) 856
 1984 SCC  Supl.  528	  1984 SCALE  (2)768


ACT:
     Administrative Law-Madhya Pradesh Cooperative Societies
Act 1960  s. 53 (4)-Delegation of power-Power conferred upon
Apex bank by Registrar of Cooperative Societies-Whether Apex
Bank could  re-delegate such  power in some other authority-
Held: No.  The Apex  Bank had  no power	 to re-delegate	 its
authority.



HEADNOTE:
     The Board	of  Directors  of  the	appellant  bank	 was
superseded by the Registrar of the Cooperative Societies and
its powers  were vested	 in the	 M.P. State Cooperative Bank
which  is   an	Apex  Bank  as	"officer-in-charge"  of	 the
superseded bank.  The Apex  Bank appointed  one S.P. Jain as
the Chief Executive officer of the appellant bank.
     Respondent No.  1, an  employee of	 the appellant bank,
was dismissed  from service  by S.P. Jain on the ground that
he  had	 overstayed  the  leave	 granted  to  him.  The	 Dy.
Registrar of  Cooperative Societies set aside the said order
of dismissal and directed reinstatement of respondent No. 1,
but it	was reversed by the Addl. Registrar in appeal by the
appellant Bank.	 In further  appeal by	Respondent No. 1 the
Board of  Revenue set  aside the  order of  termination. The
High Court  in the  Writ Petition  filed  by  appellant-Bank
agreed	with   the  Board   of	Revenue	  and  also  ordered
reinstatement of Respondent No. 1.
     Dismissing	 the   appeal  by   the	 appellant-Bank	 and
modifying the order of the High Court,
^
     HELD: The	Apex Bank  had no  authority or	 power so to
appoint S.P.  Jain for	two reasons: In the first place, the
Apex Bank,  being an  appointee of  the	 Registrar,  had  no
authority to divest itself of the power conferred upon it by
the Registrar  and to  invest S.P. Jain with that power. The
only authority	which could  have  conferred  the  necessary
power on  S.P. Jain was the Registrar. The Registrar did not
confer that power upon S.P. Jain under section 53 (4) of the
Act. Therefore the said order had no existence in the eye of
law. [858D-E]
857



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Civil  Appeal No. 996 of
1979
     From the  Judgment and  Order  dated  26.10.78  of	 the
Madhya Pradesh High Court in Misc. Petition No. 176/74.
     S.N. Kacker,  S.K. Ghambir	 and Ashok  Mahajan for	 the
appellant.
     T.U. Mehta,  S.S. Khanduja, R.D. Jain, Mehfooz Khan and
Yashpal Dhingra for the respondents.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     CHANDRACHUD, C.J.	Respondent 1  was  appointed  as  an
Agent of the appellant-Bank, which is a co-operative society
registered under  and governed	by  the	 provisions  of	 the
Madhya Pradesh Co-operative Societies Act. 1970. By an order
dated June  5, 1968 passed by one S.P. Jain, the services of
respondent 1 were terminated on the ground that he had over-
stayed the leave granted to him.
     Aggrieved by  that order, respondent 1 raised a dispute
under section  SS(2) of the Act, before the Registrar of the
Co-operative Societies. The Registrar referred the matter to
the Deputy  Register, who  by an  order dated  February	 27,
1972, allowed  the claim  of respondent 1 on the ground that
the order  terminating the  services was  not in  accordance
with Rules  44 and 45 of Co-operative Bank Employees Service
Rules. He  also ordered	 the reinstatement  of respondent  1
with full  back salary and allowances. In an appeal filed by
the Bank,  the Addl.  Registrar took  the view that the only
remedy which  was open	to respondent 1 was to claim damages
for  wrongful	termination  of	  his  services	  and  that,
therefore, he  could not be reinstated in service Respondent
1 than	filed an  appeal before	 the Board  of Revenue which
held by	 an order dated August 28, 1974, that, S.P. Jain who
held the  enquiry against  respondent 1 and passed the order
terminating his services had no power to do so. The Board of
Revenue set  aside the order of termination and remanded the
matter to  the Bank for disposal in accordance with law. The
writ petition  filed by the Bank in the High Court of Madhya
Pradesh was  dismissed on October 26, 1973. According to the
High Court,  since S.  P. Jain	had no authority to hold the
enquiry or to pass the impugned order of dismissal, the said
order had no existence in the eye of law and,
858
therefore, respondent  1 should	 be deemed  to be in service
and be	reinstated. Aggrieved  by the  judgment of  the High
Court the Bank has filed this appeal.
     We are  in agreement  with the  conclusion to which the
High Court  has come,  though for somewhat different reasons
which are as follows:-
     "The Board	 of  Directors	of  the	 appellant-Bank	 was
     superseded	 by   the  Registrar   of  the	Co-operative
     Societies by  an order  dated July	 25,  1967  and	 its
     powers were  vested in Madhya Pradesh State Cooperative
     Bank, Jabalpur,  which is an Apex Bank, as "officer-in-
     charge" of	 the superseded	 Bank. By  Resolution No. 23
     dated May	19, 1968, the Apex Bank confirmed the action
     of its  Chairman/Vice  Chairman  in  deputing,  amongst
     others S.P.  Jain as the Chief Executive officer of the
     superseded Bank.  The Apex	 Bank had  no  authority  or
     power so  to appoint  S.P. Jain for two reasons: In the
     first place,  the Apex  Bank, being an appointee of the
     Registrar, had  no authority  to divest  itself of	 the
     power conferred  upon it by the Registrar and to invest
     S.P. Jain	with that  power. The  only authority  which
     could have	 conferred the necessary power. On S.P. Jain
     was the  Registrar. The  Registrar did  not confer that
     power upon S.P. Jain under Section 53(4) of the Act".
     In the result, this appeal is dismissed with costs.
     We would  like to	add that  as long  as 16  years have
passed since the impugned order was passed and that too by a
person who  had no  authority  to  pass	 it.  Secondly,	 the
consensus of  opinion of  the various authorities which have
dealt with  this matter	 is that,  in overstaying  the leave
granted to him, respondent l was not guilty of "misconduct".
It is  desirable and  prudent that no further proceedings be
taken against  respondent 1  for the  alleged default on his
part,  which   is  the	 subject-matter	  of   the   present
proceedings.
     We modify the order of the High Court by directing that
respondent l  will be  entitled to  fifty per  cent of the ,
back wages  and i  allowances only  from June  5, 1968 until
September 30,  1984. The appellant will back respondent 1 in
its service with effect from October 1, 1984.
M.L.A.	  Appeal dismissed.
859
