

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Ayyaswami Gounder And Ors vs Munnuswamy Gounder And Ors on 25 September, 1984Equivalent citations: 1984 AIR 1789, 1985 SCR  (1) 808
Author: R Misra
Bench: Misra, R.B. (J)
           PETITIONER:
AYYASWAMI GOUNDER AND ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
MUNNUSWAMY GOUNDER AND ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT25/09/1984

BENCH:
MISRA, R.B. (J)
BENCH:
MISRA, R.B. (J)
SEN, A.P. (J)

CITATION:
 1984 AIR 1789		  1985 SCR  (1) 808
 1984 SCC  (4) 376	  1984 SCALE  (2)437


ACT:
     Rights of	a co-owner of a property-Common user of land
by a  co-owner, explained-Indian  Easements Act	 Section  8,
illustration (c)  thereto  applicability  of-Findings  of  a
Court should  always be	 with reference to specific pleading
taken-Judicial propriety  and  doctrine	 of  Stare  Decisis,
explained.



HEADNOTE:
     A partition  took place between the parties in or about
1927, whereunder  survey Nos. 95 and 96 fell to the share of
the appellants-plaintiffs  and 15  cents of land in plot no.
96/5 in	 which the common well W2 is situate and the channel
running from  that common well were, however, kept joint for
the common  enjoyment of  the parties  Water  from  well  W2
situate in  plot no. 96/5 was not sufficient to irrigate the
lands of both the parties got by them in the said partition.
The appellants-plaintiffs  therefore,  were  irrigating	 the
land in	 survey Nos.  96/3, 96/1, 95 and 92 from the well in
survey No.  103/2 purchased  by their father, in 1928 in the
name of	 their mother  under Exh.  AI by  means of  a  small
channel connecting  it to  the common  channel in the common
land in survey No. 96/5. The respondents defendants objected
to the	use by	the appellants	of the common land in survey
No. 96/5  and the  common channel running in survey No. 96/5
for taking  water from	their exclusive	 well in  survey No.
103/2. Hence  the appellants filed a suit for declaration of
their right  to take water from the exclusive well through a
portion of a channel to their plots at survey Nos. 95 and 96
lying to  the north  of the common well W2 in the joint land
of the	parties and  for a consequential relief of permanent
injunction.  Restraining   the	respondents-defendants	from
interfering with  the enjoyment of the appellants-plaintiffs
right to  take water  from  W  1  throughout  the  aforesaid
channel.  The	trial  Court,  found  that  the	 appellants-
plaintiffs being  co-owners  of	 the  common  property	were
entitled to use the property in the way advantageous to them
and the	 respondents-defendants having not pleaded or proved
any damage  or loss  to the  common property cannot obstruct
the appellants-plaintiffs  from taking	water to their lands
from their  exclusive well  through the	 common channel.  On
appeal the  first Appellate  Court  substantially  concurred
with all  the findings	of the	trial Court but to avoid any
complaint or  prejudice, thought it fit to modify the decree
of the	trial Court  by fixing	terms  for  the	 appellants-
plaintiffs'  use   of  the  channel  and  with	this  little
modification  confirmed	 the  decree  of  the  trial  Court.
However, in the second appeal
809
carried by  the respondents,  the High	Court found that the
appellants-plaintiffs by  taking water	from their exclusive
well W1 through common channel and common land which was not
and could  not have been intended by the parties at the time
of the	partition when they kept their well W2 and the lands
situated around	 it and	 the common  channel for  the common
enjoyment of the parties and allowed the appeal.
     Hence the appeal by Special Leave of the Court.
     Allowing the appeal, the Court
^
     HELD :  1:1 Findings  of a	 Court should always be with
respect to specific plea of the parties in the pleadings. In
the instant  case, in  the absence  of any specific pleading
regarding  prejudice   or  detriment   to  the	respondents-
defendants the appellants-plaintiffs have every right to use
the common  land and  the  common  channel  The	 appellants-
plaintiffs  were  claiming  their  right  on  the  basis  of
admitted co-ownership and rights which includes unrestricted
user, unlimited	 in point of dispossession. The right of co-
ownership presupposes a bundle of rights which has been lost
sight of  by the High Court and therefore the High Court was
not justified  in holding  that appellants-plaintiffs' right
to  take   water  was	acquired  by   any  grant  from	 the
respondents-defendants or  from any  other sale deed. [812H;
813A-B]
     1:2. The only restriction put by law on the common user
of the	land by	 a co-owner is that it should not be so used
as to  prejudicially effect  or put the other co-owners to a
detriment. [813D]
     (2) Illustration  (c) to  s. 8  of the Indian Easements
Act applies  where a co-owner seeks to impose an easementary
right on  the land or any part thereof. In the instant case,
however, the  appellants-plaintiffs claim  easementary right
only as	 an alternative	 ground but the main ground on which
they based  their claim	 is on	the right  of  co-ownership.
[813D]
     3:1. The judicial propriety or decorum warrants a Judge
not to hold contrary to the decision of the same High Court.
Here, if  the learned  Judge did not agree with the decision
in Subbiah Goundan's case of that High Court, he should have
referred the matter to a larger Bench.
     Subbiah Goundan  v. Ramaswamy Gounda & Ors. A.I.R. 1973
Mad. 42, approved.
     3:2.  Neither   the  law	nor  expediency	 warrants  a
conclusion that	 if the	 appellants had	 acquired new  land,
then they  cannot have any right in irrigate from the common
well or	 channel If  the parties had entered into a contract
then they would be governed by the terms of the contract but
in the	case in hand there was no such stipulation about the
manner or  mode of  enjoyment of  the common  land or common
channel. Further in these days of scarcity when every effort
is being  made at  all levels  to increase  the agricultural
production to  feed the	 country's teeming millions it would
not be	desirable to  allow  the  respondents-defendants  to
create any hurdle in the irrigation of
810
the appellants-plaintiffs'  plots through the common channel
from their exclusive well W1. [815F; D-E]
     Sivarama Pillai  & Ors. v. Marichami Pillai A.I.R, 1971
Mad. 230, held inapplicable.



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION : Civil Appeal No. 2118 of
1978
     Appeal by	Special leave  from the	 Judgment and  Order
dated the 7th April, 1978 of the Madras High Court in Second
Appeal No. 231 of 1975.
     J. Ramamurthi for the Appellants.
     Gopal Subramaniam	& Mrs.	S.  Gopalakrishnan  for	 the
Respondent.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     MISRA  J.	 The  present	appeal	of  the	 plaintiffs-
appellants by special leave is directed against the judgment
of the	High Court  dated  7th	April,	1978  reversing	 the
judgment and  decree of	 the two courts below and dismissing
the suit.
     The appellants  filed a  suit for	declaration of their
right to take water from their exclusive well marked W. 1 in
the site plan attached with the plaint and situate in a plot
of land	 exclusively belonging to them, through a portion of
a channel  to their  plots at survey Nos. 95 and 96 lying to
the north  of the  common well W. 2 in the joint land of the
parties	 and   for  a	consequential  relief  of  permanent
injunction  restraining	  the  defendants-respondents	from
interfering with  the enjoyment	 of the plaintiff's right to
take water from W. 1 through the aforesaid channel.
     The parties  are descendants from a common ancestor and
they owned  joint properties. A partition took place between
the parties  in or  about 1927 whereunder survey Nos. 95 and
96 fell	 to the share of the plaintiffs and 15 cents of land
in plot	 No. 96/5  in which  the common well W. 2 is situate
and the channel running from that common well were, however,
kept joint  for the  common enjoyment  of the parties. Water
from well  W. 2	 situate in plot No. 96/5 was not sufficient
enough to irrigate the lands of both the parties got by them
in the	said  partition.  The  plaintiffs,  therefore,	were
irrigating their lands from the well in survey No. 103/2
811
purchased by  the father  of the  plaintiffs in	 1928 in the
name of	 plaintiffs' mother  under Ext.	 A.  I	through	 the
common channel	from their  own well  in survey No. 103/2 by
connecting the	common channel	in the common land in survey
No. 96/5  by means of a small channel to take water to their
lands in  survey Nos.  96/3, 96/1, 95 and 92. The defendants
objected to  the use  of the  common land in survey No. 96/5
and the common channel running in survey No. 96/5 for taking
water from  their exclusive  well in survey No. 103/2. Hence
the plaintiffs	were obliged  to  file	the  suit  mentioned
above.
     The defendants  admitted the plaintiffs' right to enjoy
the common  well, the  common land and the common channel in
survey No.  96/5. They, however, pleaded that the plaintiffs
were not  entitled to  use the	common property	 for  taking
water from their exclusive well in survey No. 103/2 to their
family lands  north of	the common  well. They also disputed
the existence  of the  channel from  1928 as  pleaded by the
plaintiffs and	further contended  that the plaintiffs could
not acquire  any easmentary  rights over  the common land to
take water from their exclusive well. They, however, did not
plead or  prove any  damage, injury  or hardship suffered by
the defendants	to show that they were in any way prejudiced
by plaintiffs  forming a small channel in the common land to
take water  from their	exclusive well to their family lands
north of the suit property.
     The trial	court by  its judgment	dated 16th June 1973
found that  the plaintiffs  being co-owners  of	 the  common
property were  entitled to  use the property in the way most
advantageous to	 them and  the defendants having not pleaded
or proved  any damage  or loss to the common property cannot
obstruct the  plaintiffs from  taking water  to their  lands
from their  exclusive well  through the	 common channel.  It
will be	 relevant at this stage to quote the observations of
the trial court:
	  "Except asserting  that it will affect him, D.W. 1
     is not  able to  specify in  what way  the act  of	 the
     plaintiffs cause  damage or  inconvenience	 to  him  in
     exercising his right in taking water through the common
     channel. All  that he  would say is that the plaintiffs
     should not	 have a	 channel AB  on the  common piece of
     land."
812
     The trial court, however, did not record and finding on
the  prescriptive   right  of	easement  pleaded   by	 the
plaintiffs, in view of its finding that the plaintiffs being
co-owners can use the common land to form a channel.
     On appeal	by the	defendants the first Appellate Court
by  its	  judgment  dated   16th  July,	 1974  substantially
concurred with	all the	 findings of the trial court. But to
avoid any  complaint or	 prejudice which  the defendants may
complain of,  through nothing  was pleaded  or	proved,	 the
learned Judge  thought it  fit to  modify the  decree of the
trial court  by fixing	terms for the plaintiffs' use of the
channel. With  this little  modification the first Appellate
Court confirmed the decree of the trial court.
     The defendants  feeling aggrieved took up the matter in
second appeal  and the High Court by its judgment dated 12th
of June,  1978 reversed the judgments and decrees of the two
courts	below  and  dismissed  the  suit  holding  that	 the
plaintiffs did	not acquire  any right either by grant or by
prescription by	 way of	 easement. The	High Court, however,
found  that  the  plaintiffs  by  taking  water	 from  their
exclusive well	through the common channel would be throwing
additional burden  on the  common channel  and	common	land
which was  not and  could not  have  been  intended  by	 the
parties at  the time  of the  partition when they kept their
well W.	 1 and	the lands  situated around it and the common
channel for the common enjoyment of the parties.
     The  plaintiffs-appellants	 have  now  approached	this
Court and  reiterated the same arguments as advanced by them
in the two courts below.
     The learned  counsel  for	the  appellants	 strenuously
contended that in the absence of any specific plea regarding
prejudice to  the defendants  by the  use of the common land
and the	 common channel	 the High Court was not justified in
recording a  finding that additional burden to the prejudice
of the	defendants would  be put  on the  common channel and
that this  could never	have been intended by the parties at
the time of the partition.
     We find  considerable force  in this contention. In the
absence of  any specific  pleading  regarding  prejudice  or
detriment to  the defendants-respondents the plaintiffs have
every right to use the com-
813
mon land  and common channel. The plaintiffs-appellants were
claiming their	right on  the basis of admitted co-ownership
rights which  includes unrestricted user, unlimited in point
of disposition,	 and the  High Court  was not  justified  in
holding that  the plaintiffs'  right to	 take water  was not
acquired by  any grant	from the  defendants-respondents  or
from  any   other  sale	 deed.	The  right  of	co-ownership
presupposes a boundle of rights which has been lost sight of
by the High Court.
     The only  restriction put	by law on the common user of
land by	 a co-owner  is that  it should not be so used as to
prejudicially  affect	or  put	 the  other  co-owner  to  a
detriment.
     It was  further contended	that the Illustration (c) to
s. 8  of the  Indian Easements	Act relied  upon by the High
Court had no application to the facts of the present case in
as much	 as the	 plaintiffs' case  mainly hinges  upon their
right as  co-owners and	 not on the basis of prescription by
easementary right.  Illustration (c)  to s.  8 of the Indian
Easements Act  applies where  a co-owner  seeks to impose an
easementary right  on the  land or  any part thereof. In the
instant case,  however,	 the  plaintiffs  claim	 easementary
right only  as an  alternative ground but the main ground on
which they  based  their  claim	 is  on	 the  right  of	 co-
ownership.
     The plaintiffs  cited the	case of	 Subbiah Goundan  v.
Ramaswamy Goundan & Ors. before the High Court. In a similar
situation it observed:
	  "In the  instant case,  the defendants make use of
     the  common   channel  for	  taking  water	 from  their
     exclusive well  in S.  No. 24 only during their turn of
     enjoyment of  the common  well. Such  use of the common
     channel, by  no  stretch  of  reason  can	be  said  to
     interfere with  the right	of the plaintiff in any way.
     Nor can it be said that the said user of the channel by
     the defendants  would in  any way	damage or weaken the
     channel. Unless  the plaintiff  proves that such use by
     the defendants in any way interferes with his rights or
     that the  common channel  is being	 or is	likely to be
     damaged or	 injured or  weakened he  cannot prevent the
     defendants from  making use of the channel during their
     turn of  enjoyment of  the common	well by taking water
     from  their   exclusive  well   also,  which   is	most
     advantageous and beneficial from their point of view."
814
     If the  learned Single  Judge did	not agree  with that
decision he  should have  referred the	matter to  a  larger
Bench and  the judicial propriety or decorum did not warrant
holding contrary  to the  decision of the same High Court by
him.
     The defendants  indeed  are  adopting  a  'dog  in	 the
manager' policy. Although they do not stand to be prejudiced
or put to any detriment on their own pleadings, they seek to
prevent the  plaintiffs from  irrigating their lands through
the common  channel from  their exclusive  well. There is no
other source of irrigation for the plaintiffs.
     Counsel for  the defendants-respondents  on  the  other
hand contended	that the well W. 1 was built after partition
by the plaintiffs on their exclusive land and, therefore, no
additional burden  could be  put by  the plaintiffs  on	 the
common channel	and if the plaintiffs acquired new land then
they cannot  have any right of irrigate from the common well
or channel. It was also contended that no proof of damage or
prejudice was necessary. In support of their contention they
relied upon the decision of the Madras High Court in Sivarma
Pillai &  Ors. v.  Marichami Pillai.  In that  case it was a
common ground  that as	an integral  part of  the  partition
arrangement, both  the branches	 would have  equal right  to
take water from the well and that right should be worked out
by the	plaintiff taking  water from the well for three days
and the	 defendants in	the next three days thereafter. That
case was  decided on  the basis of the terms of agreement at
the time  of partition. It is in the setting of the facts of
that case that the High Court observed:
	  "In the nature of things, a well cannot be divided
     by metes and bounds and persons who own joint rights in
     a well  (to the  right of	the water  in the  well) can
     enjoy that	 right either  jointly or separately only by
     resort  to	 a  workable  arrangement  safeguarding	 and
     securing the  right to  irrigate the  lands allotted to
     the  respective  branches....It  is  implicit  in	such
     arrangements that	the common source of irrigation, the
     well  is  kept  in	 common	 for  the  only	 purpose  of
     irrigation	 the   lands  which   are  allotted  to	 the
     respective branches  and to  serve that  purpose  only,
     leaving out of
815
     account the  other incidental  purposes  like  bathing,
     washing clothes,  taking water  for  cattle,  etc.	 The
     scheme of the arrangement cannot admit of any notion of
     the parties  being entitled  to the particular quantity
     of water  (so many	 gallons) treating  that alone	as a
     distinct item  of property divorced from the lands. The
     well is  sot apart	 as common  property  for  the	most
     beneficial and  profitable enjoyment of the land and it
     does not  matter what  label the  parties give to their
     rights in	the  well,  whether  it	 is  a	right  to  a
     particular share in the well or whether a right to take
     water by turns. But what is crucial is that in the case
     of lands, valuable right is the source of irrigation."
     This case	is distinguishable  on facts  inasmuch as in
that case  at the  time of partition the well was kept joint
and arrangements had been entered into about the mode of use
of the	well fixing the duration. If the parties had entered
into a	contract then they would be governed by the terms of
the contract  but in  the case	in hand	 there was  no	such
stipulation about  the manner  or mode	of enjoyment  of the
common well and the common channel.
     There is  yet another  reason why we would be reluctant
to encourage  the defendants  to stop  the  plaintiffs	from
irrigating  their  fields  from	 their	own  exclusive	well
through the  common channel.  In these days of scarcity when
every effort  is being	made at	 all levels  to increase the
agricultural production to the country's teeming millions it
would not be desirable to allow the defendants to create any
hurdle in  the irrigation  of the  plaintiff's plots through
the common  channel from their exclusive well. Thus, neither
the law	 nor expediency	 warrants a conclusion as desired by
the defendants.
     For the  foregoing discussion  the appeal must succeed.
It is accordingly allowed and the judgment and decree of the
High Court  is set  aside and  the one	passed by  the first
appellate court	 is restored  in order	to avoid  any likely
prejudice   to	  the	defendants   respondents.   In	 the
circumstances of  the case  the parties shall bear their own
costs.
S.R. Appeal allowed.
816
