

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Raghbir Singh vs State Of Haryana on 13 September, 1984Equivalent citations: 1984 AIR 1796, 1985 SCR  (1) 724
Author: E Venkataramiah
Bench: Venkataramiah, E.S. (J)
           PETITIONER:
RAGHBIR SINGH

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF HARYANA

DATE OF JUDGMENT13/09/1984

BENCH:
VENKATARAMIAH, E.S. (J)
BENCH:
VENKATARAMIAH, E.S. (J)
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)

CITATION:
 1984 AIR 1796		  1985 SCR  (1) 724
 1984 SCC  (4) 348	  1984 SCALE  (2)365


ACT:
     Code of  Criminal Procedure  e 1973  (Act II  of  1974)
Section	 428   read  with   Punjab  &	Haryana	 High  Court
Instruction No.	 29442 Rules  VI. V. 38 dt 19.11. 1945 Scope
of-Set off  against the	 term of  imprisonment of  period of
detention undergone  by an  accused, explained-Whether it is
open to	 a person  who is  undergoing imprisonment  on being
convicted of  an offence  committed by him to claim that the
period occupied	 by the	 investigation or inquiry carried on
and the	 trial held  while he was undergoing imprisonment in
respect of another offence alleged to have been committed by
him should  be set  off against	 the  term  of	imprisonment
imposed on him on being convicted of the latter offence.



HEADNOTE:
     The petitioner  was  convicted  for  an  offence  under
Section 307  and Section  459 of  the Indian  Penal Code and
sentenced  on  February	 1,  1980  to  a  term	of  rigorous
imprisonment.  During	the  pendency	of  the	  trial	 the
petitioner was	in judicial custody with effect from January
11, 1980  in  another  case  F.I.R.  315/78  under  Sections
457/380/411 of the Indian Penal Code which also ended in his
conviction on February 16, 1981 and was sentenced for a term
of rigorous  imprisonment. In the latter case it was ordered
that the  petitioner was entitled to the set off as provided
by Section  428 of  the Code. The petitioner claimed that in
spite of his conviction in the earlier case from February 1,
1980 he	 was entitled for set off from 11.1.1980 to 16.2.81.
The question  in the present Writ Petition is whether such a
claim is in order.
     Dismissing the Writ Petition, the Court
^
     HELD: 1.  The petitioner  is not entitled to claim that
the period  between February  1, 1980  on which	 date he was
convicted in  the Sessions  Case and  February 16,  1981  on
which date  he was convicted by the Metropolitan Magistrate,
Delhi in  another case	when he	 was undergoing imprisonment
imposed on  him in  the Sessions  Case	should	be  set	 off
against the term of imprisonment imposed by the Metropolitan
Magistrate, Delhi.  That period should be counted as part of
the imprisonment  undergone by the petitioner as directed in
the Sessions Case. [728G-H]
     2: 1.  Section 428	 of the	 Code of  Criminal Procedure
1973  was  introduced  with  the  object  of  remedying	 the
unsatisfactory state of affairs that was prevail-
725
ing when  the former  Code of 1898 was in force. It was then
found that many persons were being detained in prison at the
pre-conviction stage for unduly long periods, many times for
periods longer than the actual sentence of imprisonment that
could be imposed on them on conviction. [727F-G]
     2: 2.  In order to secure the benefit of Section 428 of
the Code, the prisoner should show that he had been detained
in prison  for the purpose of investigation inquiry or trial
of the case in which he is later on convicted and sentenced.
It follows  that if  a person  is undergoing the sentence of
imprisonment imposed by a court of law on being convicted of
an offence  in one  case during the period of investigation,
inquiry or  trial of  some other  case, he cannot claim that
the period  occupied by such investigation, inquiry or trial
should be set off against the sentence of imprisonment to be
imposed in  the latter case even though he had been detained
during such  period. In	 such a case the period of detention
is really  a part  of the period of imprisonment which he is
undergoing  having   been  sentenced   earlier	for  another
offence. It  is not the period of detention undergone by him
during the  investigation, inquiry or trial of the same case
in which  he is	 later on convicted and sentenced to undergo
imprisonment. He cannot claim a double benefit under Section
428 of	the Code  that is  the same  period being counted as
part of	 the period  of imprisonment  imposed for committing
the former offence and also being set off against the period
of imprisonment imposed for committing the latter offence as
well. The  instruction issued  by the High Court of Punjab &
Haryana No.  29442 Rules VI. V. 38 dated 29th November, 1975
is unexceptionable. [727G-H]



JUDGMENT:
     ORIGINAL JURISDICTION: Writ Petition (Criminal) No. 941
of 1984.
	  (Under article 32 of the Constitution of India)
     S.L. Chibber for the Petitioner.
     Ashwani Kumar and R.N. Poddar for the Respondent.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     VENKATARAMIAH, J.	The short  question which arises for
decision  in   this  petition	under  Article	 32  of	 the
Constitution is	 whether it  is open  to  a  person  who  is
undergoing imprisonment	 on being  convicted of	 an  offence
committed by  him to  claim that  the period occupied by the
investigation or inquiry carried on and the trial held while
he was undergoing imprisonment in respect of another offence
alleged to  have been  committed by  him should	 be set	 off
against the  term of  imprisonment imposed  on him  on being
convicted of  the latter  offence, under  section 428 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as
'the Code').
726
     The facts	relevant for  the purpose  of this  case are
these: The petitioner was convicted of an offence punishable
under section  307 of the Indian Penal Code and sentenced to
undergo rigorous  imprisonment for  seven years and to pay a
fine of	 Rs. 100/- in a Sessions Case on February 1, 1980 by
the Addl.  Sessions Judge,  Karnal. In the same case, he was
also convicted of an offence punishable under section 459 of
the Indian  Penal Code	and sentenced  to  undergo  rigorous
imprisonment for  five years and to pay a fine of Rs. 100/-.
Both the  sentences of	imprisonment were  directed  to	 run
concurrently. The  petitioner was  in judicial	custody with
effect from  January 11,  1980 in  another case	 F.I.R.	 No.
315/78 under  sections 457/380/411  of the Indian Penal Code
before a  Metropolitan Magistrate  at Delhi. That case ended
in his	conviction on  February	 16,  1981  for	 an  offence
punishable under section 457 of the Indian Penal Code and he
was sentenced  to undergo  imprisonment for  one year and to
pay a  fine of	Rs. 200/-. In the same case he was convicted
of an  offence punishable  under section  380 of  the Indian
Penal Code  and sentenced  to undergo  rigorous imprisonment
for four  months and  to pay  fine.  The  two  sentences  of
imprisonment imposed  in this  case  were  directed  to	 run
concurrently. In  this case  it was further ordered that the
petitioner was	entitled to  the  set  off  as	provided  by
section 428 of the Code. It is not necessary to refer to the
other case  or cases  in which he has also been convicted in
order to decide the issue involved in this case.
     The petitioner  is undergoing rigorous imprisonment for
seven years  as directed by the Addl. Sessions Judge, Karnal
in the	Sessions case  from February 1, 1980 at the District
Jail at Rohtak. The sentences of imprisonment imposed by the
Metropolitan Magistrate,  Delhi will  commence to run at the
expiration of the imprisonment imposed by the Addl. Sessions
Judge, Karnal as prescribed by section 427 of the Code since
the court  has not  directed that  the	subsequent  sentence
shall run  concurrently	 with  the  previous  sentence.	 The
petitioner, however,  contends that since he was in judicial
custody	 from  January	11,  1980  in  connection  with	 the
investigation and  trial of  the case  which  ended  in	 his
conviction by  the Metropolitan	 Magistrate on	February 16,
1981, the  whole of  the period between January 11, 1980 and
February 16,  1981 should be set off against the sentence of
imprisonment imposed  by the Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi.
This claim  of the  petitioner is  contested  by  the  State
Government of  Haryana. It  is urged  on behalf of the State
Government that while the petitioner is entitled
727
to set off under section 428 of the Code, the period between
January 11,  1980 and  February 1, 1980 on which date he was
sentenced to  imprisonment for	seven  years  by  the  Addl.
Sessions Judge,	 Karnal against the sentence of imprisonment
imposed by  the Metropolitan  Magistrate, Delhi,  the period
between February 1, 1980 and February 16, 1981 on which date
the petitioner was convicted by the Metropolitan Magistrate,
Delhi cannot  be  set  off  since  during  that	 period	 the
petitioner was	actually undergoing  imprisonment imposed on
him in the Sessions case. The State Government has relied in
support of  its contention  on the instruction issued by the
High Court  of Punjab and Haryana in No. 29442 Rules VI.V.38
dated November	29, 1975,  the relevant	 part of which reads
thus:
     "The period  of detention	undergone by  a	 convict  in
     execution of sentence of imprisonment imposed on him by
     a court  of law  while facing  inquiry or trial in some
     other case(s) should not be set off against the term of
     imprisonment imposed on him on conviction in such other
     case(s)."
     We	 are   concerned  in   the  present  case  with	 the
correctness of the above instruction.
 Section 428 of the Code reads thus:
     "428. Period  of detention	 undergone by the accused to
     be set  off against the sentence of imprisonment.-Where
     an accused person has: on conviction, been sentenced to
     imprisonment for  a  term	not  being  imprisonment  in
     default of payment of fine, the period of detention, if
     any, undergone by him during the investigation, inquiry
     or trial  of the  same case and before the date of such
     conviction, shall	be  set	 off  against  the  term  of
     imprisonment imposed on him on such conviction, and the
     liability of  such person	to undergo  imprisonment  on
     such conviction  shall be	restricted to the remainder,
     if any, of the term of imprisonment imposed on him."
     There was	no provision corresponding to section 428 of
the Code  in the  Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 which was
repealed and replaced by the present Code. It was introduced
with the  object of  remedying the  unsatisfactory state  of
affairs that  was prevailing  when the	former Code  was  in
force. It  was then  found  that  many	persons	 were  being
detained in  prison at	the pre-conviction  stage for unduly
long periods,  many times for periods longer than the actual
sentence
728
of imprisonment that could be imposed on them on conviction.
In order  to remedy  the above situation, section 428 of the
Code was  enacted. It  provides for  the setting  off of the
period of  detention as	 an under trial prisoner against the
sentence of  imprisonment imposed  on him. Hence in order to
secure the  benefit of section 428 of the Code, the prisoner
should show  that he  had been	detained in  prison for	 the
purpose of  investigation, inquiry  or trial  of the case in
which he  is later  on convicted  and sentenced.  It follows
that if	 a person is undergoing the sentence of imprisonment
imposed by  a court  of law on being convicted of an offence
in one	case during  the period of investigation, inquiry or
trial of  some other  case, he	cannot claim that the period
occupied by  such investigation,  inquiry or trial should be
set off	 against the  sentence of imprisonment to be imposed
in the latter case even though he was under detention during
such period.  In such  a case  the period  of  detention  is
really a  part of  the period  of imprisonment	which he  is
undergoing  having   been  sentenced   earlier	for  another
offence. It  is not the period of detention undergone by him
during the  investigation, inquiry or trial of the same case
in which  he is	 later on convicted and sentenced to undergo
imprisonment. He cannot claim a double benefit under section
428 of	the Code  i.e. the same period being counted as part
of the	period of  imprisonment imposed	 for committing	 the
former offence	and also being set off against the period of
imprisonment imposed  for committing  the latter  offence as
well. The  instruction issued  by the  High  Court  in	this
regard is unexceptionable. The stand of the State Government
has, therefore, to be upheld.
     The petitioner  is not,  therefore, entitled  to  claim
that the  period between  February 1,  1980 on which date he
was convicted  in the Sessions case and February 16, 1981 on
which date  he was convicted by the Metropolitan Magistrate,
Delhi when  he was undergoing imprisonment imposed on him in
the Sessions  case should  be set  off against	the term  of
imprisonment imposed  by the Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi.
That period  should be	counted as  part of the imprisonment
undergone by  the petitioner  as directed  in  the  Sessions
case.
     No other contention is urged.
     In the result the petition is dismissed.
S.R. Petition dismissed.
729
