

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Lallu Ram And Ors vs State Of U.P. And Anr on 27 September, 1984Equivalent citations: 1984 AIR 1886, 1985 SCR  (1) 862
Author: Y Chandrachud
Bench: Chandrachud, Y.V. ((Cj)
           PETITIONER:
LALLU RAM AND ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF U.P. AND ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT27/09/1984

BENCH:
CHANDRACHUD, Y.V. ((CJ)
BENCH:
CHANDRACHUD, Y.V. ((CJ)
VENKATARAMIAH, E.S. (J)
VARADARAJAN, A. (J)

CITATION:
 1984 AIR 1886		  1985 SCR  (1) 862
 1984 SCC  Supl.  424	  1984 SCALE  (2)593


ACT:
     Administration of	Justice-When a	life convict appeals
that he	 was convicted	for a  murder that  never  was,	 the
Supreme Court can reconsider the question seriously and call
for further  reports  for  done	 fuller	 justice-Acquittals-
Attempts to  secure false acquittals by forging a fictitious
documents deprecated-Constitution  of  India,  1950  Article
136.



HEADNOTE:
     The appellants  were convicted  and sentenced to suffer
imprisonment for life for the murder of a person by the name
of Kunwar  Bahadur in  the village of Bamori Kalan, District
Jalaun on  July 18,  1971. Based on a news item carried by a
Hindi daily  called 'Nav  Bharat' on  June 3, 1983, that the
dead body  of one  Kunwar Bahadur Singh was found in Vidisha
in suspicious  circumstances and  that a letter purported to
have been  written by one Kunwar Bahadur Singh was recovered
from the  person of  the deceased,  the appellants  filed  a
petition before	 the High  Court of  Madhya Pradesh, praying
for their  acquittals contending  that Kunwar  Bahadur Singh
for whose  murder they	were convicted in 1971 was alive for
twelve years thereafter and, therefore, their conviction was
illegal. The  High Court  dismissed the	 petition. Hence the
appeal by Special Leave of the Court.
     Dismissing the appeal, the Court,
^
     HELD; 1:1. When a person convicted of murder raised the
question that  he has material to show that he was convicted
for a murder that had never taken place, as, for example, by
showing that  the  person  who	was  alleged  to  have	been
murdered  is  in  fact	alive  the  Supreme  Court  has	 the
jurisdiction, in appropriate cases, to call for further data
from the  concerned authorities	 in  order  to	examine	 the
contention of  the convict.  This jurisdiction	on which the
Supreme Court  can exercise,  though with circumspection, is
in order  to do	 complete justice  in any  matter  which  is
pending before	it or  which has  been disposed	 of  by	 it.
[863G-H, 864A]
     1: 2.  The instant case, however, is an example of what
an incredible amount of ingenuity is exercised by the people
to secure  false acquittals. The two reports called for from
the District Magistrate, Vidisha, and the two photographs of
863
the two	 dead bodies  found in	1971 and  1983, respectively
make it	 clear that,  (1) Kunwar  Bahadur  Singh  for  whose
murder the  appellants were  convicted thirteen years ago is
not the	 same person  whose dead  body was  found on June 2,
1983 in	 Vidisha and  (2) The  letter which was found on the
person of  the dead  body on  June 2,  1983 is	a forged and
fictitious  document   manufactured  for   the	purpose	  of
obtaining false acquittals. [863D, 864E, 865E-F]



JUDGMENT:
     CRIMINAL APPELLATE	 JURISDICTION: Criminal	 Appeal	 No.
476 of 1984.
     Appeal by	Special leave  from the	 Judgment and  Order
dated the  6th December, 1983 of the Allahabad High Court in
Appeal No. 611 of 1976.
     Dr.  N.   M.  Ghatate  and	 C.K.  Ratnaparkhi  for	 the
Appellants.
     Manoj Swarup  Dalveer Bhandari  and A.K. Sanghi for the
Respondents.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     CHANDRACHUD, C.J.	It is necessary to record this short
order so  that it  may be  known as  to what  an  incredible
amount of  ingenuity is	 exercised by  the people  to secure
false acquittals.
     A person  by the name of Kunwar Bahadur was murdered in
the village  of Bamori	Kalan, District	 Jalaun, on July 18,
1971. The appellants were convicted for that murder and were
sentenced to suffer imprisonment for life.
     On June 2, 1983, dead body was found in Vidisha, Madhya
Pradesh. A  letter purported  to have  been written  by	 one
Kunwar	Bahadur	  was  recovered  from	the  person  of	 the
deceased. On  the next	day, June  3, 1983,  a	Hindi  daily
called 'Nav  Bharat' carried  a news item to the effect that
the dead  body of  one Kunwar  Bahadur Singh  was  found  in
Vidisha in  suspicious circumstances  and  that	 the  letter
which was  recovered from  the person of the deceased showed
that he	 was repentant.	 This news  item is  alleged to have
come to	 the notice  of the relatives of the appellants, who
contacted  the	 Vidisha  police.   The	 contention  of	 the
appellants is  that Kanwar  Bahadur,   for whose murder they
were convicted in 1971 was alive for 12 years thereafter and
that his  dead body  was found	on June	 2,  1983.  By	this
appeal, they  pray for an order of acquittal, or rather, for
an order  setting aside	 their 12 year old conviction on the
ground that they were convicted for a murder that never was.
864
Since this  appeal raised  a question  of serious concern to
the administration  of justice,	 an order was passed by this
Court on  April 11,  1984 directing the District Magistrate,
Vidisha, to  hold an  inquiry  into  the  allegation  as  to
whether the person called Kunwar Bahadur, who was alleged to
have been  murdered in	1971,  was  found  alive  after	 the
alleged murder	and was	 thereafter murdered  in some  other
incident which	took place in 1983. The District Magistrate,
Vidisha, Shri  O.P.  Dube,  has	 submitted  a  report  which
deserves high  praise. He  has	recorded  statements  of  18
persons and has examined documents leading to the conclusion
that the  person whose body was found on June 2, 1983 is not
the person who was murdered in 1971 and for whose murder the
appellants were sentenced to life imprisonment.
     It is  clear from the report of the District Magistrate
that the  letter which	was found  on the person of the dead
body on	 June 2,  1983 is  a forged  and fictitious document
manufactured for  the purpose  of  getting  over  the  order
whereby the  appellants were  convicted for  the  murder  of
Kunwar Bahadur	in 1971.  The age  of Kunwar Bahadur who was
murdered in  1971 does	not tally with the age of the person
alleged to  be Kunwar  Bahadur whose  dead body was found on
June 2, 1983. The close relatives of the real Kunwar Bahadur
who was	 murdered in  1971, have  stated before the District
Magistrate that	 the handwriting  of the letter found on the
person of the dead body which was discovered on June 2, 1983
is not that of Kunwar Bahadur who was murdered in 1971.
     After the	receipt of the District Magistrate's Report,
this appeal  came up for hearing on August 13, 1984 when Dr.
N.M. Ghatate,  appearing for  the appellants, asked that the
District Magistrate  should be	directed further to show the
photograph of  the dead body which was discovered on June 2,
1983, to  the close  relatives of Kunwar Bahadur in order to
remove any  doubt on  the question  whether the person whose
dead body  was found  in 1983 is the very Kunwar Bahadur for
whose murder  the  appellants  were  convicted.	 Seeing	 the
plausibility of	 this submission,  a direction	was given by
this Court  to the District Magistrate to do the needful and
submit a further report to this Court.
     In	 accordance   with  the	  aforesaid  direction,	 the
District Magistrate  showed the	 photograph of the dead body
which was
865
found on  June 2,  1983 to  Kaushilya Rani, Jamana Das Lodhi
and Sughar Singh who are respectively the widow, brother and
son of	Kunwar Bahadur who was murdered in 1971. The brother
and son	 of Kunwar Bahadur stated that the photograph of the
dead body  which was  discovered on June 2, 1983 is not that
of Kunwar Bahadur. Kaushilya Rani stated before the District
Magistrate that	 her husband  was tall and slim, that he was
not fat	 and that  his complexion  was fair. However she was
unable to  say whether	the photograph shown to her was that
of her	husband, since	the impression in the photograph was
not clear.
     On	 the   basis  of   these  statements,  the  District
Magistrate has	submitted a  Supplementary  Report  to	this
Court stating  that the	 photograph of	the dead body is not
that  of  Kunwar  Bahadur.  We	had  directed  the  District
Magistrate to  forward to  us, along  with his	report,	 the
photograph of  Kunwar Bahadur  who was	murdered in 1971 and
the photograph	of the	dead body  which was  found in 1983.
Having compared	 these two  photographs, which are annexures
and 10	to the	report of the District Magistrate, we are of
the opinion  that  the	conclusion  to	which  the  District
Magistrate has	come is	 correct. There	 is  no	 resemblance
between the two photographs.
     The District Magistrate has stated that the officers of
the Vidisha  Police Station are guilty of a serious lapse in
not registering	 the crime  of murder  when a  dead body was
found in  their jurisdiction on June 2, 1983. As observed by
him in this report which is drawn with commendable care, the
entire case  is shrouded  in suspicion	and deserves  to  be
inquired into by the higher Police authorities.
     In the  result, we	 are  of  the  opinion	that  Kunwar
Bahadur for  whose murder  the appellants  were convicted 13
years ago,  is not the same person whose dead body was found
on June	 2, 1983  in  Vidisha.	The  appeal  is	 accordingly
dismissed.
S.R.	  Appeal dismissed.
866
