

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Sheoratan Agarwal & Another vs State Of Madhya Pradesh on 12 September, 1984Equivalent citations: 1984 AIR 1824, 1985 SCR  (1) 719
Author: O C Reddy
Bench: Reddy, O. Chinnappa (J)
           PETITIONER:
SHEORATAN AGARWAL & ANOTHER

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH

DATE OF JUDGMENT12/09/1984

BENCH:
REDDY, O. CHINNAPPA (J)
BENCH:
REDDY, O. CHINNAPPA (J)
MADON, D.P.

CITATION:
 1984 AIR 1824		  1985 SCR  (1) 719
 1984 SCC  (4) 352	  1984 SCALE  (2)362


ACT:
     Essential	  Commodities	 Act,	 1955-Section	 10-
Interpretation of-Company  contravening an  order made under
s.3-Whether the	 person	 in-charge  or	an  officer  of	 the
company at  the relevant period can be prosecuted separately
without prosecuting the company.



HEADNOTE:
     The two  appellants, who were the Managing Director and
the Production-Manager	of a  public limited  company,	were
prosecuted by the respondent for alleged violations by their
company of  clauses 2  (c) (i)	and 3  of the Madhya Pradesh
Pulses, Edible	Oil Seeds  and Edible  Oil Dealers Licensing
Order, 1977  and clause	 3 of  the Madhya  Pradesh Essential
Commodities (Price Exhibition and Price Control) Order, 1977
read with  sections 3 and 7 of the Essential Commodities Act
(the Act,  for short).	The appellants	moved the High Court
under sections 397 and 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure
to quash  the proceedings  against them	 on the	 ground that
they could  not, in  law, be  prosecuted unless	 the company
itself	was  prosecuted.  The  High  Court  over-ruled	this
contention and hence these appeals by special leave.
	  Dismissing the appeals,
^
     HELD: 1.  Section 10  of the  Act lists the persons who
may be	held guilty  and punished  when it is a company that
contravenes an	order made  under Section 3 of the Act. They
are: (1)  the company  itself (2)  every person	 who, at the
time the  contravention was committed, was in charge of, and
was responsible	 to, the  company for  the  conduct  of	 the
business of  the company,  that is,  the person-in-charge of
the company,  and (3)  any director,  manager, secretary  or
other  officers	  of  the  company  with  whose	 consent  or
connivance or  because of  neglect attributable	 to whom the
offence has  been committed,  that is,	an  officer  of	 the
company. [722C-F]
     2. It  is clear  from the	language of  Section 10 that
there is  no statutory	compulsion that the person-in-charge
or an officer of the company may not be prosecuted unless he
be ranged  alongside the company itself. Each or any of them
may be	separately prosecuted  or along	 with the company if
there is a contravention of an order made under Section 3 of
the Act	 by the	 company. It  does no lay down any condition
that the person-in-charge or an officer of
720
the company  may not be separately prosecuted if the company
itself is  not prosecuted. Therefore the prosecutions of the
appellants are	maintainable and  that there  is nothing  in
Section 10 of the Act which bars such prosecution
					     [722 G,H, 723F]
     State of  Madras v	 C.V. Parekh  and another,  AIR 1971
S.C. 447,  State of Gujarat v. Chandulal Jethalal, (1980) 21
Gujarat Law  Reporter 353,  Mirji Brothers Oil Mill v. State
of Karnataka,  1980 (2)	 Karnataka Law	Journal 35 and Santi
Kumar	Agarwala   v.	State,	 ILR.	1975   Cuttack	 86,
distinguished.
     Durgamata Oil  Mill v. Calcutta Municipality, 1978 Crl.
L.J. 222,  D.K. Jain v. State, AIR 1965 All. 525 and Chander
Bhan v.	 The  State,  1975  All	 India	Prevention  of	Food
Adulteration, held inapplicable.



JUDGMENT:
     CRIMINAL APPELLATE	 JURISDICTION: Criminal	 Appeal Nos.
452-453 of 1984.
     Appeals by	 Special leave	from the  Judgment and Order
dated the 1st July, 1983 of the Madhya Pradesh High Court in
Criminal Revision  No. 105  of 1983  and Misc. Crl. Case No.
366 of 1983.
     S.T. Desai,  M.S. Ganesh  and S.C.	 Dagadiya,  for	 the
appellants.
     Ravindra Bana and A.K. Sanghi for the respondents.
     The Judgement of the Court was delivered by
     CHINNAPPA REDDY, J. Special Leave granted.
     A complaint  was laid  by the  State of  Madhya Pradesh
through	 the  Inspector,  Food	and  Civil  Supplies,  Dewas
against	 the   two   petitioners   Sheoratan   Agarwal	 and
Raghunandanlal Chaturvedi,  the Managing  Director  and	 the
Production Manager  of M/s  5-S Limited,  a  public  Limited
Company with  its registered office at Calcutta, for alleged
violations of  clause 2	 (c)(i) and  3 of the Madhya Pradesh
Pulses, Edible	Oil Seeds  and Edible  Oil Dealers Licensing
Order, 1977  and clause	 3 of  the Madhya  Pradesh Essential
Commodities (Price Exhibition and Price Control) Order, 1977
read with sections 3 and 7 of the Essential Commodities Act.
The petitioners moved the High Court of Madhya Pradesh under
sections 397  and 482  of the  Code of Criminal Procedure to
quash the  Proceedings against	them on the ground that they
could not,  in law,  be prosecuted unless the Company itself
was prosecuted.	 The High  Court  overruled  the  contention
raised on behalf of the petitioners. Hence these two appeals
by Special Leave under Article 136 of the Constitution.
721
     Shri S.T.	Desai, learned	counsel for the petitioners,
urged the  same	 contention  before  us,  relying  for	that
purpose	 upon  the  language  of  s.  10  of  the  Essential
Commodities Act,  and the decision of this Court in State of
Madras v.  C. V. Parekh and another and the decision of some
High Courts:  State of	Gujarat v. Chandulal Jethalal, Mirji
Brothers  Oil  Mill  v.	 State	of  Karnataka,	Santi  Kumar
Agarwala v. State.
     We do  not think  that the	 language of  s. 10  of	 the
Essential Commodities  Act justifies  the submission made on
behalf of  the petitioners  that if  it is  alleged that the
person contravening  the  order	 made  under  the  Essential
Commodities  Act  is  a	 Company,  the	prosecution  of	 the
Directors, the	officers, and  servants of  the	 Company  or
other persons  is precluded  unless the	 Company  itself  is
prosecuted. We	are afraid  the submission made on behalf of
the petitioners	 proceeds upon	a  misunderstanding  of	 the
decision of  this Court	 in State  of Madras v. C.V. Parekh.
(supra). So  do the  various other  decisions of High Courts
cited before us.
 Section 10	 of the	 Essential  Commodities	 Act  is  as
follows:
	  "(1) If  the person  contravening  an	 order	made
     under Sec.	 3 is  a company,  every person	 who, at the
     time the contravention was committed, was in charge of,
     and was responsible to, the company, shall be deemed to
     be guilty	of the	contravention and shall be liable to
     be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
	  Provided  that  nothing  contained  in  this	sub-
     section shall  render any	such person  liable  to	 any
     punishment if  he proves  that the	 contravention	took
     place without  his knowledge  or that  he exercised all
     due diligence to prevent such contravention.
	  (2) Notwithstanding  anything	 contained  in	sub-
     section (1),  where an  offence under this Act has been
     committed by  a company  and  it  is  proved  that	 the
     offence  has   been  committed   with  the	 consent  or
     connivance of, or is attributable
722
     to any  neglect on	 the part of, any director, manager,
     secretary	or   other  officer   of  the  company	such
     director, manager,	 secretary or  other  officer  shall
     also be  deemed to	 be guilty of that offence and shall
     be	 liable	  to  be   proceeded  against  and  punished
     accordingly.
     Explanation-For the purpose of this section,-
     (a)  "company" means any body corporate, and includes a
	  firm or other association of individuals; and
     (b)  "director" in	 relation to  a firm means a partner
	  in the firm."
The Section  appears to	 our mind to be plain enough. If the
contravention of  the order  made under	 Section 3  is by  a
Company, the persons who may be held guilty and punished are
(1) the Company itself (2) every person who, at the time the
contravention was  committed, was  in  charge  of,  and	 was
responsible to,	 the Company for the conduct of the business
of the	Company whom  for short	 we shall  describe  as	 the
person-in-charge of  the  Company,  and	 (3)  any  director,
manager, secretary  or other  officer of  the  Company	with
whose  consent	 or  connivance	  or  because	of   neglect
attributable to	 whom the  offence has	been committed, whom
for short  we shall  describe as  an officer of the Company.
Any one	 or more  or all  of  them  may	 be  prosecuted	 and
punished. The  Company alone  may be prosecuted. The person-
in-charge only	may be prosecuted. The conniving officer may
individually  be   prosecuted.	One,  some  or	all  may  be
prosecuted.  There  is	no  statutory  compulsion  that	 the
person-in-charge or  an officer	 of the	 Company may  not be
prosecuted unless he be ranged alongside the Company itself.
Section 10 indicates the persons who may be prosecuted where
the contravention  is made  by the  Company. It does not lay
down any  condition that  the person-in-charge or an officer
of the	Company may  not be  separately	 prosecuted  if	 the
Company itself is not prosecuted. Each or any of them may be
separately prosecuted  or alongwith  the Company. Section 10
lists the person who may be held guilty and punished when it
is a  Company that contravenes an order made under Section 3
of the	Essential Commodities  Act.  Naturally,	 before	 the
person in-charge or an officer of the Company is held guilty
in that	 capacity it must be established that there has been
a contravention	 of the order by the Company. That should be
axiomatic and  that is all that the Court laid down in State
of Madras  v. C.  V. Parekh  (supra) as a careful reading of
that case will show and
723
not that  the person-in-charge	or an officer of the Company
must be	 arraigned simultaneously  along with the Company if
he is  to  be  found  guilty  and  punished.  The  following
observations made by the Court clearly bring out the view of
the Court:-
     "It was  urged that  the two respondents were in charge
     of, and  were  responsible	 to,  the  company  for	 the
     conduct  of   the	business   of	the   Company	and,
     consequently, they	 must be  held responsible  for	 the
     sale and for thus contravening the provisions of clause
     5 of  the Iron and Steel (Control) order. This argument
     cannot  be	 accepted,  because  it	 ignores  the  first
     condition for  the applicability of S. 10 to the effect
     that the  person  contravening  the  order	 must  be  a
     company itself.  In  the  present	case,  there  is  no
     finding either  by the  Magistrate OR by the High Court
     that the  sale in	convention of clause 5 of the Iron &
     Steel (Control) order was made by the Company. In fact,
     the Company  was not  charged with	 the offence at all.
     The liability  of the  persons in charge of the Company
     only arises  when the  contravention is  by the Company
     itself. Since,  in this  case, there is no evidence and
     no finding	 that the  Company contravened	Cl. 5 of the
     Iron & Steel (Control), order the two respondents could
     not be  held responsible.	The actual contravention was
     by Kamdar and Villabhadas Thacker and any contravention
     by	 them	would  not   fasten  responsibility  on	 the
     respondents."
     The sentences  underscored by us clearly show that what
sought to  be emphasised  was that there should be a finding
that the contravention was by the Company before the accused
could be  convicted and	 not that  the Company itself should
have  been   prosecuted	 along	with  the  accused.  We	 are
therefore clearly  of the  view that  the  prosecutions	 are
maintainable and  that there is nothing in section 10 of the
Essential Commodities Act which bars such prosecutions.
     The learned  counsel also	invited our attention to the
decisions in  Durgamata Oil  Mill v.  Calcutta Municipality,
D.K. Jain  v. State  and Chander  Bhan v. The State. None of
these cases  has  any  application.  They  arose  under	 the
Prevention of  Food Adulteration  Act and  it is unnecessary
for us to consider them. The appeals are rejected.
M.L.A.	  Appeals dismissed.
724
