

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Mathew Areeparmtil & Ors vs State Of Bihar And Ors on 20 September, 1984Equivalent citations: 1984 AIR 1854, 1985 SCR  (1) 776
Author: S M Fazalali
Bench: Fazalali, Syed Murtaza
           PETITIONER:
MATHEW AREEPARMTIL & ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF BIHAR AND ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT20/09/1984

BENCH:
FAZALALI, SYED MURTAZA
BENCH:
FAZALALI, SYED MURTAZA
VARADARAJAN, A. (J)
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)

CITATION:
 1984 AIR 1854		  1985 SCR  (1) 776
 1985 SCC  (2) 102	  1984 SCALE  (2)402


ACT:



HEADNOTE:
     Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, s. 144 and s. 169.
     The writ petitioners brought to the notice of the Court
that a	very large  number of people had been languishing in
jails without trial for petty offences.
     Disposing of the writ petitions,
^
     HELD: (1)	In all	cases instituted against the adivasi
accused involving  sentence of 7 years or more, they will be
entitled to  be released  on consideration  of merit  by the
court on  executing a  personal bond.  These cases  will  be
disposed of on merits expeditiously.[777E]
     (2) In  the other cases where trial has already started
and which  do not  come within the first category, indicated
above, the  accused will  be entitled to be released on bail
on executing  a personal bond in the absence of very special
circumstances.[777F]
     (3) In  cases where  no proceedings  at all  have taken
place in  regard to the accused within 3 years from the date
of the	lodging of  FIR,  the  accused	should	be  released
forthwith under section 169 Cr.P.C. [777G]
     (4) If  there are	other cases  in which neither change
sheet  have   been  submitted  nor  investigation  has	been
completed during the last three years, the accused concerned
should be  released forthwith  subject to reinvestigation of
the said cases on fresh facts and they shall not be arrested
without	 the   permission  of	the  Magistrate	  and  where
permission is given they would be released by the Magistrate
on execution of personal bond. [777H; 778A-B]
     (5) Section  144 Cr.  P.C. should	not be	misused	 and
orders under  this Section  should be passed in the light of
principles laid down in 1983 (4) SCC 161 at page 169.



JUDGMENT:
     ORIGINAL JURISDICTION:  Writ Petition  (Criminal)	Nos.
371-75 of 1983.
     (Under article 32 of the Constitution of India)
     Govind  Mukhoty   and  Ms.	  Kamini  Jaiswal   for	 the
petitioners.
777
     L.N, Sinha,  K.G. Bhagat,	Addl. Sol.  General,  R.  N.
Poddar,
     P.P. Singh and D. Goburdhan for Respondents.
     The Order of the Court was delivered by
     FAZAL ALI,	 J. We have heard counsel for the parties at
length and  have also gone through the Reports and documents
filed by  the petitioners.  In view  of the  fact  that	 the
counsel for  the respondents  are more or less agreed to the
order we  propose to  pass, it	is not	necessary to go into
further details.
     The facts	as gleaned  from the  Reports and  documents
reveal a  most shocking	 state of  affairs in  the region in
question. It  seems that  a very large number of people have
been languishing  in jails without trial for petty offences.
Though most  of the  said people  are alleged  to have	been
released but  the main infirmity has not been cured. Without
going into  further details,  we dispose of the petitions in
terms of the following Order:
     "(1) In  all   cases  instituted  against	the  adivasi
	  accused concerned  which  involve  sentence  of  7
	  years	 or  more,  they  will	be  entitled  to  be
	  released on  consideration of	 merit by  the court
	  concerned only on executing a personal bond. These
	  cases will be disposed of on merits expeditiously.
     (2)  In the other cases where trial has already started
	  and which  do not  come within the first category,
	  indicated above,  the accused	 will be entitled to
	  be released  on bail	on executing a personal bond
	  in the absence of very special circumstances.
     (3)  In the  cases where  no proceedings  at  all	have
	  taken place  in regard  to the  accused  within  3
	  years from  the date	of the	lodging of  FIR, the
	  accused should be released forthwith under section
	  169 Cr.P.C.
     (4)  If there  are other cases in which neither charge-
	  sheet have  been submitted  nor investigation	 has
	  been completed  during the  last three  years, the
	  accused
778
	  concerned should  be released forthwith subject to
	  reinvestigation of  the said	case on	 fresh facts
	  and  they   shall  not  be  arrested	without	 the
	  permission of	 the Magistrate and where permission
	  is given  they would be released by the Magistrate
	  on execution of personal bond.
We would  like to  observe that	 Section 144 Cr. P.C. should
not be	misused and  orders under  this	 Section  should  be
passed in  the light of principles laid down in 1983 (4) SCC
161 at page 169.
     At the same time, we would like to warn Adivasi accused
that they  should not  take the	 law in	 their own  hands by
shooting or  using their  arrows on  Government Officers  or
other forest  officers. If  they have any complaint they can
move the  appropriate authority and get suitable orders from
him.
H.S.K.
779
