

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Arjun Chaubey vs Union Of India And Others on 23 March, 1984Equivalent citations: 1984 AIR 1356, 1984 SCR  (3) 302
Author: Y Chandrachud
Bench: Chandrachud, Y.V. ((Cj), Tulzapurkar, V.D., Pathak, R.S., Madon, D.P., Thakkar, M.P. (J)
           PETITIONER:
ARJUN CHAUBEY

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
UNION OF INDIA AND OTHERS

DATE OF JUDGMENT23/03/1984

BENCH:
CHANDRACHUD, Y.V. ((CJ)
BENCH:
CHANDRACHUD, Y.V. ((CJ)
TULZAPURKAR, V.D.
PATHAK, R.S.
MADON, D.P.
THAKKAR, M.P. (J)

CITATION:
 1984 AIR 1356		  1984 SCR  (3) 302
 1984 SCC  (2) 578	  1984 SCALE  (1)612
 CITATOR INFO :
 F	    1985 SC1416	 (130)


ACT:
     Service Jurisprudence-Dismissal  order  passed  by	 the
competent authority  dispensing with  an enquiry  under Rule
14(ii) of the Railway Servants (Discipline and Appeal) Rules
1968  read  with  Proviso  (b)	to  Article  311(2)  of	 the
Constitution Majority  of charges  of appellant's misconduct
are in	relation to  competent authority  who dismissed him-
Doctrine of  bias-Accusser cannot  be a	 judge	of  his	 own
cause-Natural Justice, Principles, violated.



HEADNOTE:
     The appellant  was working	 as a  senior clerk  in	 the
office of  the	chief  Commercial  Superintendent.  Northern
Railway, Varanasi  on May  22, 1982,  the senior  Commercial
officer wrote  a letter to him calling upon him to offer his
explanation  in	  regard  to   twelve	charges	  of   gross
indiscipline, mostly relating to the Deputy Chief Commercial
Superintendent. The  appellant submitted  his explanation to
the charges  by his  reply dated  June 9,  1982. On the very
next day,  the Deputy Chief Commercial Superintendent served
a  second   notice  upon   the	appellant  saying  that	 the
explanation offered  by him  was  not  convincing  but	that
another	 chance	  was  being  given  to	 him  to  offer	 his
explanation  regarding	 the  specific	charges	 which	were
conveyed to  him earlier.  By this letter, the appellant was
also called  upon to  submit his  explanation  within  three
days' as  to why deterrent disciplinary action should not be
taken against  him.  The  appellant  submitted	his  further
explanation on	June 14, 1982, but on the very next day, the
Deputy	Chief  Commercial  Superintendent  passed  an  order
dismissing him	from service  on the  ground that he was not
fit to be retained in service.
     The appellant  filed a  writ petition in the High Court
of Allahabad  challenging the  order of dismissal on various
grounds. The  writ petition  was  dismissed  and  hence	 the
appeal special leave of the Court.
     Allowing the appeal, the Court.
^
     HELD: 1:  1. The  order of dismissal passed against the
appellant stands  vitiated for	the simple  reason that	 the
issue as  to who, between the appellant and Respondent No. 3
(the  dismissing  authority)  was  speaking  the  truth	 was
decided by  Respondent No. 3. The main thrust of the charges
against the  appellant related to his conduct qua Respondent
3. Therefore,  it was  not open	 to the	 latter	 to  sit  in
Judgment over  the explanation	offered by the appellant and
decided that  the explanation was untrue. No person can be a
judge in his own
303
cause and  no witness  can certify that his own testimony is
true. Any  one who  has a  personal stake in an enquiry must
keep himself  aloof from the conduct of the inquiry. [306 F-
H]
     1: 2. On the facts of the case, the illegality touching
the  proceedings   which  ended	 in  the  dismissal  of	 the
appellant is  "so patent and loudly obtrusive that it leaves
an  indelible	stamp  of  infirmity"  on  the	decision  of
Respondent No. 3. [307 B-C]
     2. From  the charges  2 to 7 and 11, it is obvious that
if an  enquiry were  to be  held  into	the  charges  framed
against	 the   appellant,  the	principal  witness  for	 the
Department would  have been Respondent No. 3 (the dismissing
authority) himself  as the  main accuser  and the  target of
appellant's misconduct.	 Surprisingly, the explanation dated
June 9,	 1982 of  the appellant	 to the letter of accusation
dated May 22,1982 was considered on its merits by Respondent
himself. Thereby,  the accuser	became the  Judge. [305 G-H,
306 A]
     Not only that, the further explanation submitted by the
appellant was  considered by  Respondent No.  3 himself. The
order of  dismissal dated  June 15, 1962 which was issued by
Respondent No. 3 recites that he was fully satisfied that it
was not	 reasonably practicable	 to hold an inquiry into the
appellant's conduct as provided by the Rules and that he had
come to	 the conclusion that the appellant was not fit to be
retained in  service and  had, therefore,  to be  dismissed,
Evidently, Respondent  3 assessed  the	weight	of  his	 own
accusations against  the appellant  and	 passed	 a  judgment
which is one of the easiest to pass, namely, that he himself
was truthful  person and the appellant a liar. In doing this
Respondent No. 3 violated a fundamental principle of natural
justice. [305 B-C, 306 F]
     The State	of U.P.	 v. Mohammad  Nooh [1958]  SCR	595,
referred to.
     3. The  contention that  inspite  of  the	above  legal
position, the  appellant does  not deserve the assistance of
the court, since he was habitually guilty of acts subversive
of discipline  cannot be  accepted. In	the first  place, to
hold the  appellant guilty  of habitual acts of indiscipline
is to assume something which remains unproved, Secondly, the
illegality from	 which the  order  of  dismissal  passed  by
Respondent No.	3 suffers  is of  a character  so grave	 and
fundamental that  the alleged  habitual misbehaviour  on the
part of the appellant cannot cure or condone it. [307 C-E]
     4. The  aviod needless complications in working out the
mutual rights  and obligations	of the	parties,  the  court
directed:
     (i)  The appellant	 who is	 due to	 retire from service
	  shall be  treated as	having retired	from service
	  with effect from April 1, 1984:
     (ii) He shall be paid arrears of salary due until March
	  31, 1984  on the basis of salary last drawn by him
	  on June  15, 1982  without taking into account the
	  increments which  he might  have earned subsequent
	  to that date:
304
    (iii) The Provident Fund and gratuity shall also be paid
	  to the  appellant as calculated in accordance with
	  the rules,  as if no order of dismissal was passed
	  against him; and
     (iv) he may  not and shall not rejoin his duties and he
	  will be  treated as  on leave	 between 23rd March,
	  1984 and 31st March, 1984.  [307 F-H, 308 A-B]



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 2613 of
1983.
     From the Judgment and order dated 19-11-82 of Allahabad
High Court in Civil Misc. Writ No. 8287 of 1982.
     R.K Garg, S.N. Singh and D.K. Garg, for the appellant.
     P.R. Mridul,  Miss A.  Subhashini,	 R.N.  Poddar,	C.V.
Subba Rao and A.K. Ganguli for the respondents.
     The judgment of the Court was delivered by
     CHANDRACHUD, C.J. The appellant was working as a senior
clerk in  the office of the Chief Commercial Superintendent,
Northern Railway,  Varanasi. On	 May  22,  1982	 the  Senior
Commercial officer  wrote a  letter to him, calling upon him
to offer  his explanation  in regard  to 12 charges of gross
indiscipline. The appellant submitted his explanation to the
charges by  his reply  dated June  9, 1982. On the very next
day, the  Deputy Chief	Commercial Superintendent  served  a
second	notice	 upon  the   appellant,	 saying	  that	 the
explanation offered  by him  was  not  convincing  but	that
another	 chance	  was  being  given  to	 him  to  offer	 his
explanation  regarding	 the  specific	charges	 which	were
conveyed to  him by  the letter	 of May	 22, 1982.  By	this
letter, the  appellant was  also called	 upon to  submit his
explanation  within   three  days   as	to   why   deterrent
disciplinary action  should not	 be taken  against him.	 The
appellant submitted  his further  explanation  on  June	 14,
1982, but  on the very next day, the Deputy Chief Commercial
Superintendent passed  an order	 dismissing him from service
on the ground that he was not fit to be retained in service.
     The appellant  filed a  writ petition in the High Court
of Allahabad  challenging the  order of dismissal on various
grounds. The  Union of	India, the Senior Commercial officer
and  the   Deputy  Chief   Commercial  Superintendent	were
impleaded to that petition
305
as Respondents	1 to  3.  That	writ  petition	having	been
dismissed by  the High	Court, the  appellant has filed this
appeal by special leave.
     The order	dismissing the	appellant from	service	 was
passed by  Respondent 3	 under Rule  14(ii) of	the  Railway
Servants (Discipline  and  Appeal)  Rules,  1968  read	with
Proviso	 (b)   to  Article   311(2)  of	  the  Constitution.
Respondent 3  recorded his  reasons in writing for coming to
the conclusion	that it	 was not  reasonably practicable  to
hold an	 inquiry into  the conduct  of the  appellant in the
manner provided	 by the	 relevant rules,  and thereafter, he
proceeded to pass the order of dismissal without holding any
inquiry.
     Quite some time was taken by the appellant's counsel in
arguing	 upon	the  true  meaning  and	 intendment  of	 the
Discipline and	Appeal Rules,  1968 and	 in urging  that the
appellant should  have been afforded an opportunity of being
heard on  the question	as to  whether, it  was or  was	 not
reasonably practicable	to hold	 an inquiry into the charges
levelled against  him. It  was also  urged  by	the  learned
counsel that the fact that it was not reasonably practicable
to hold a full-fledged inquiry as contemplated by the Rules,
did not justify the non-holding of any inquiry at all. We do
not propose  to enter  into the	 merits of these contentions
since, the  appellant is  entitled  to	succeed	 on  another
ground.
     The  letter   dated  May	22,  1982   which   contains
accusations  of	  gross	 misconduct  against  the  appellant
enumerates 12  charges, out of which Charges Nos. 2 to 7 and
11 refer  to  the  appellant's	misconduct  in	relation  to
Respondent 3.  For example,  the second	 charge alleges that
the  appellant	entered	 the  office  of  Respondent  3	 and
challenged him	in an  offensive  and  derogatory  language.
Charge No.  3 says  that the  appellant was  in the habit of
forcing himself on Respondent 3 two or three times every day
with  petty  complaints.  Charge  No.  4  alleges  that	 the
appellant stormed  into	 the  office  of  Respondent  3	 and
shouted at him, using foul words. Charges 5, 6 and 7 contain
similar allegations.  The allegation contained in Charge No.
11 is  to the  effect that  behaving as a leader of goondas,
the appellant  hired  the  services  of	 other	goondas	 and
created security  problems for	Respondent 3 and the members
of his	family. It  is obvious that if an inquiry were to be
held into  the charges	framed against	the  appellant,	 the
principal  witness   for  the  Department  would  have	been
Respondent 3  himself as  the main accuser and the target of
appellant's misconduct.	 It is	surprising in  this  context
that the
306
explanation dated  June 9,  1982 which	was furnished by the
appellant to the letter of accusation dated May 22, 1982 was
considered on  its merits  by Respondent 3 himself. Thereby,
the accuser  became the	 judge. The  letter written  to	 the
appellant by Respondent 3 on June 10, 1982 says:
	  "I  have   carefully	gone  through  your  defence
     explanation dated	9.6.82. to the charges given in this
     office letter of even No. dated 22.5.82 and the same is
     not convincing  at all.  Before taking any action under
     D. & A.R., I would like to offer you another chance for
     giving  your   explanation	 to   the  specific  charges
     conveyed to you vide this office letter dated 22.5.82.
	  Please  submit  your	defence	 explanation  within
     three days	 as to	why a  deterrent disciplinary action
     should not be taken against you".
     The appellant  submitted his further explanation, which
also was considered by Respondent 3 himself.
     The order	of dismissal  dated June  15, 1982 which was
issued by  Respondent 3	 recites that he was fully satisfied
that it	 was not  reasonably practicable  to hold an inquiry
into the  appellant's conduct  as provided  by the Rules and
that he	 had come  to the  conclusion that the appellant was
not fit	 to be retained in service and had, therefore, to be
dismissed. Evidently,  Respondent 3  assessed the  weight of
his own	 accusations against  the  appellant  and  passed  a
judgment which	is one	of the easiest to pass, namely, that
he himself  was a  truthful person and the appellant a liar.
In doing this, Respondent 3 violated a fundamental principle
of natural justice.
     The main  thrust of  the charges  against the appellant
related to  his conduct	 qua Respondent 3. Therefore, it was
not  open  to  the  latter  to	sit  in	 judgment  over	 the
explanation offered  by the  appellant and  decide that	 the
explanation was	 untrue. No person can be a judge in his own
cause and  no witness  can certify that his own testimony is
true. Any  one who  has a  personal stake in an inquiry must
keep himself aloof from the conduct of the inquiry.
     The order	of dismissal  passed against  the  appellant
stands vitiated	 for the  simple reason that the issue as to
who, between th
307
appellant and  Respondent 3,  was  speaking  the  truth	 was
decided by Respondent 3 himself.
 In The  State of Uttar Pradesh v. Mohammad Nooh, 1 S.R.
Das, C.J.,  observed, while  speaking for the majority, that
the roles  of a	 judge and a witness cannot be played by one
and the	 same person  and that	it is futile to expect, when
those roles  are combined that the judge can hold the scales
of justice  even. We  may borrow  the language of Das, C.J.,
and record a finding on the facts of the case before us that
the illegality	touching the  proceedings which ended in the
dismissal  of	the  appellant	is  "so	 patent	 and  loudly
obtrusive that it leaves an indelible stamp of infirmity" on
the decision of Respondent 3.
     Mr. Mridul,  appearing on	behalf	of  the	 respondent,
contended' that	 though this may be the true legal position,
the appellant  does not	 deserve the assistance of the Court
since, he  was	habitually  guilty  of	acts  subversive  of
discipline. This argument does not impress us.
     In the  first place,  to hold  the appellant  guilty of
habitual acts  of indiscipline	is to assume something which
remains unproved.  Secondly, the  illegality from  which the
order of  dismissal passed  by Respondent  3 suffers is of a
character so grave and fundamental that the alleged habitual
misbehaviour on	 the part  of the  appellant cannot  cure or
condone it.
     In the  result, we	 allow the  appeal and set aside the
judgment of  the High  Court. The  order dated June 15, 1982
whereby the  appellant was  dismissed from  service  is	 set
aside. In order, however, to avoid needless complications in
working	 out  the  mutual  rights  and	obligations  of	 the
parties, we  direct that the appellant, who is due to retire
within about  six months, shall be treated as having retired
from service  with effect  from April  1, 1984.	 He shall be
paid the  arrears of  his salary due until March 31, 1984 on
the basis  of the salary last drawn by him on June 15, 1982,
without taking	into account  the increments  which he might
have earned  subsequent to that date. The provident fund and
gratuity shall	also be	 paid to the appellant as calculated
in accordance  with the	 rules, as  if no order of dismissal
was passed against him. The appellant may
308
not and	 shall not  rejoin his duties. He will be treated as
on leave between now and March 31, 1984.
     The arrears  of salary  until March  31, 1984  shall be
paid to	 the appellant	on the	basis indicated above, on or
before that  date and,	in any	event, not later than May 1,
1984. The  provident fund  and gratuity shall be paid to him
within a period of two months from today.
     Mr. Garg  made a  statement before	 us on behalf of his
client, the  appellant, that  the appellant  is	 neither  in
occupation of any official residential accommodation, nor is
he in  possession of  the garage  which is  referred  to  in
Charge No. 6 in the letter of May 22, 1982.
     The appeal will stand disposed of in terms of the above
order. Respondent  1, the  Union of  India, shall pay to the
appellant a  sum of Rs. 1,000/- (Rupees one thousand) as his
costs.
S.R.					    Appeal allowed.
309




