

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
State Of Uttar Pradesh vs Zavad Zama Khan on 4 May, 1984Equivalent citations: 1984 AIR 1095, 1984 SCR  (3) 789
Author: A Sen
Bench: Sen, A.P. (J)
           PETITIONER:
STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
ZAVAD ZAMA KHAN

DATE OF JUDGMENT04/05/1984

BENCH:
SEN, A.P. (J)
BENCH:
SEN, A.P. (J)
DESAI, D.A.
ERADI, V. BALAKRISHNA (J)

CITATION:
 1984 AIR 1095		  1984 SCR  (3) 789
 1984 SCC  (3) 505	  1984 SCALE  (1)938
 CITATOR INFO :
 R	    1986 SC 356	 (3)
 R	    1988 SC 227	 (9)


ACT:
     Public Safety  Laws-National Security  Act (Act  XLV of
1980)  Section	14-Revocation  of  orders  of  detention-Due
compliance  with  requirement  of  section  8(1)  read	with
Article 22(5)  of the  Constitution though.  complied  with,
subsequent representation  for revocation  to Prime Minister
made through  the counsel  filed by  the Central Government-
Whether	 non-passing   of  any	 order	on   the  revocation
representation vitiates the detention.



HEADNOTE:
     The facts are that the respondent made a representation
dated June  18, 1983 against an order of detention passed by
the District  Magistrate, Moradabad  dated November  6, 1982
for his	 detention under  sub-s. (3) of s. 3 of the National
Security Act,  1980, and  the same was duly forwarded by the
District Magistrate  to the Advisory Board on June 21. 1983.
The State  Government had in the mean while on June 13, 1983
made a	reference tn  the Advisory  Board under s. 10 of the
Act i.e.  within three	weeks from  the	 dale  of  detention
together  with	the  order  of	detention  and	the  grounds
therefor  for	its  opinion.	On   June   23,	  1983	 the
representation was  examined by	 the Joint  Secretary,	Home
Department who marked the file to the Home Secretary on June
27, 1983  who on  his turn  placed the file before the Chief
Minister for  his comments  on	June  27,  1983.  The  Chief
Minister took  to days	to study  the  file  and  ultimately
passed an  order rejecting  the representation.	 On July  2,
1983 the  State Government forwarded the representation made
together with  the comments  to the  Government of India and
the Central Government rejected the same on July 19, 1983.
     It appears	 that on July S, 1983 the respondent through
his counsel simultaneously addressed two representations for
revocation of  his detention  under s.	14 of  the Act,	 one
addressed to  the Prime	 Minister of  India and the other to
the State Government. The representation made to the Central
Government addressed  in the  name of the Prime Minister was
received in the Prime Minister's Secretariat on July 7, 1983
and the	 grievance of  the respondent  before the High Court
was that  the Central  Government had  not  dealt  with	 his
application for	 the revocation	 of the	 order of  detention
under s.  14 of	 the Act.  The High  Court observed that the
right of  the detenu to make a representation to the Central
Government for revocation of the order of detention under s.
14 of  Act  was	 intended  to  be  an  additional  check  or
safeguard against  the improper	 exercise of  its  power  of
detention by the detaining authority or the State Government
and therefore  the  failure  on	 the  part  of	the  Central
Government to  consider the  same was tantamount to a denial
of the	constitutional safeguard  as  contemplated  by	Art.
22(5)
790
of the	Constitution.  It  accordingly	held  the  continued
detention of the respondent to be illegal.
     Aggrieved by  the order, the State preferred an Special
Leave.
     Allowing the appeal, the Court,
^
     HELD: (1)	The constitutional imperatives of Art. 22(5)
enjoin	 that	 where	 a   detenu   simultaneously   makes
representation to  the detaining  authority as	well  as  an
application under  s. 14  of the Act, they must not be dealt
with by	 the appropriate  Government at	 the same  time	 and
there was  no question	of any	conflict of jurisdiction. If
the Central Government were to revoke the order of detention
under s. 14 of the Act, there would be no representation for
the State  Government to  consider, or refer to the Advisory
Board under  s. 8(b)  of the  Act nor  will there  arise any
question of  Advisory Board  making a  report to  it, or  on
receipt of  such a report, confirming the order of detention
under section  8(f). The  other type  of cases	can be where
notwithstanding	 that	the  order  of	detention  has	been
confirmed under	 s. 8(f)  the appropriate Government may, at
any time,  revoke  the	same  under  s.	 14.  The  power  of
revocation conferred  on the appropriate Government under s.
14 is  independent of  the power  of confirming	 or  setting
aside an order or detention under s. 8(f) [795H; 796A-D]
     2. The  power of  revocation conferred  on the  Central
Government under s. 14 of the Act is a statutory power which
may be	exercised on  information received  by tile  Central
Government from	 its own  sources including that supplied by
tile State  Government under sub-s. (5) of s. 3, or from the
detenu in  the form  of a  petition or representation. It is
for the	 Central Government  to decide	whether	 or  Dot  it
should revoke  the order  of detention in a particular case.
[796G-H]
     Any lapse on the part of State Government in forwarding
the  representation  made  by  the  detenu  to	the  Central
Government for revocation of the order of detention under s.
14 of  the Act	or non-consideration  of  the  same  by	 the
Central Government  makes the  continued  detention  of	 the
detenu bad. [793B-C]
     In the  present  case,  however,  the  detenu  was	 not
deprived of  the right	of making  a representation  to	 the
detaining authority  under Art.	 22(5) of  the	Constitution
read with  s. 8(1)  of the  Act. Although  the detenu had no
right to  simultaneously make  a representation	 against the
order of  detention to	the Central  Government	 under	Art.
22(5) and  there was no duty cast on the State Government to
forward the same to the Central Government, nevertheless the
State Government  forwarded the	 same forthwith. The Central
Government duly	 considered  that  representation  which  in
effect was  nothing but	 a representation  for revocation of
the order  of detention	 under s.  14 of the Act. That being
so. it	was not	 obligatory  on	 the  parr  of	the  Central
Government  to	 consider  a   second	representation	 for
revocation under s. 14 of the Act. [797A-D]
791



JUDGMENT:
     CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 57
of 1984.
     From the  Judgment and  Order dated  25-10-1983 of	 the
Allahabad High Court in Habeas Corpus WP. No. 8420 of 1983.
     Manjo Swarup and Dalveer Bhandari for the appellant.
     Mrs. &  Mr. Qamaruddin,  Rizwan A.	 Hafiez and Desh Raj
for the respondent.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     SEN, J.  The State	 Government  of	 Uttar	Pradesh	 has
preferred this appeal by special leave from the judgment and
order of  the Allahabad High Court dated October 25, 1983 by
which the  High Court  issued a writ in the nature of habeas
corpus quashing an order of detention passed by the District
Magistrate,  Moradabad	 dated	November  6,  1982  for	 the
detention of  the respondent under sub-s. (3) of s. 3 of the
National Security  Act, 1980  on being	satisfied  that	 his
detention was  necessary "with a view to preventing him from
acting in  any manner  prejudicial  to	the  maintenance  of
Public order."
     It appears	 that the  respondent  is  alleged  to	have
committed an  offence of  murder punishable under s. 302 and
of causing disappearance of evidence punishable under s. 201
of the	Indian Penal  Code,  1860  in  connection  with	 the
communal riots	that occurred  in  the	Moradabad  city.  On
November 6,  1982, the District Magistrate, Moradabad passed
the impugned  order of	detention but it could not be served
on the	respondent as  he was  absconding. As required under
sub-s. (4) of s. 3, the District Magistrate forthwith made a
report of  the fact to the State Government of Uttar Pradesh
that he	 had passed  an	 order	for  the  detention  of	 the
respondent under  sub-s. (3)  of s.  3 of  the Act, together
with the  grounds on  which the order had been made and such
other particulars  as, in  his opinion, had a bearing on the
matter. The State Government received the order of detention
on November 8, 1982 and approved of the same on November 11,
1982 under  sub-s. (5)	of s. 3, and as required thereunder,
forwarded a report to the Central Government on the next day
i.e. On November 12, 1982. The respondent surrendered to the
police on  May 24,  1983 and the impugned order of detention
was served on him in District Jail,
792
Moradabad on  June 1, 1983 and the grounds of detention were
furnished to him on June 2, 1983.
     The respondent  made a  representation dated  June	 18,
1983 through the Superintendent, District Jail Moradabad and
he  immediately	  forwarded  the   same	 to   the   District
Magistrate.  On	  June	20,  1983  the	District  Magistrate
forwarded the  representation to  the Advisory Board and the
same was  received by  the Advisory  Board on June 21, 1983.
The State  Government had  in the  meanwhile on June 13,1983
made a	reference to  the Advisory  Board under s. 10 of the
Act i.e.  within three	weeks from  the	 date  of  detention
together with  the  order  of  detention,  and	the  grounds
therefore,  for	  its  opinion.	  On  June   23,  1983	 the
representation of  the respondent  forwarded by the District
Magistrate together  with his  comments was  examined by the
Joint Secretary, Home Department. The file was placed before
the Home Secretary on June 27, 1983 who placed it before the
Chief Minister	with his  comments. The	 Chief Minister took
two days  to study  the file  and ultimately passed an order
rejecting the  representation on  June 30,  1983. On July 2,
1983 the  State Government forwarded the representation made
by  the	  respondent  together	with  its  comments  to	 the
Government of  India and the Central Government rejected the
same on July 19, 1983.
     On July 5, 1983 the respondent through his counsel D.S.
Misra  simultaneously	addressed  two	representations	 for
revocation of  his detention  under s.	14 of  the Act,	 one
addressed to  the Prime	 Minister of  India and the other to
the State  Government. It  appears that	 the  representation
made to	 the Central Government addressed in the name of the
Prime  Minister	  was  received	  in  the   Prime   Minister
Secretariat on	July  7,  1983	and  the  grievance  of	 the
respondent was	that the  Central Government  had not  dealt
with  his   application	 for  revocation  of  the  order  of
detention under s. 14 even now.
     In his  counter-affidavit by  one	M.L.  Miglani,	Desk
officer, Ministry  of Home Affairs, New Delhi, it was stated
that  the   Central  Government	 had  fully  discharged	 its
functions by  expeditiously taking a decision on the earlier
representation directly	 ad dressed by the respondent and it
was under no statutory obligation to consider the subsequent
representation for  revocation addressed  by the  respondent
through his  counsel to	 the Prime  Minister. I	 was  not  a
statutory representation for revocation of the impugned
793
order of  detention under  s. 14 and therefore it was not at
all necessary for the Central Government to deal with it.
     The High Court placing reliance on the decision of this
Court in  Phillippa Anne  Duke v.  State of Tamil Nadu & Ors
and certain  of its  own decisions  held that the respondent
had a right to make an application to the Central Government
for revocation	of the order of detention and the failure on
the part  of the  Central Government to apply its mind to it
made the continued detention illegal.
     The only  question canvassed in the appeal before us is
that the  judgment of  the High Court betrays, complete lack
of  awareness	a  of	the  nature  of	 the  constitutional
safeguards enshrined  under Art.  22(5) of the Constitution.
It is  urged that  the constitutional imperatives enacted in
Art. 22(5)  are two-fold;  (1) The detaining authority must,
as soon	 as maybe  i.e. as  soon as  practicable, after	 the
detention, communicate	to the	detenu the  grounds on which
the order  of detention has been made. And (2) The detaining
authority must afford the detenu the earliest opportunity of
making representation against the order of detention. In the
present ease, it is said that the requirements of Art. 22(5)
of the	Constitution read  with s.  8(1) of the Act had been
duly complied with. There is no question of any violation of
Art. 22(5)  or of  s. 8(1)  and further that the grounds for
detention set  out  the	 facts	with  sufficient  degree  of
particularity and  they did  furnish  sufficient  nexus	 for
forming	 the   subjective  satisfaction	  of  the  detaining
authority.  The	 order	of  detention  cannot  therefore  be
challenged on the ground that the grounds furnished were not
adequate or  sufficient for  the subjective  satisfaction of
the  detaining	 authority,  or	  for  making  an  effective
representation. It  is further	urged that  there being	 due
compliance with	 the  constitutional  requirements  of	Art.
22(5) and  of s.  8(1), the  High Court was wrong in holding
that the  continued detention  of the respondent was invalid
merely because	the Central Government refused to act on his
application for	 revocation of	the order of detention under
s. 14  of  the	act.  We  find	considerable  force  in	 the
submission.
     We are not oblivious of the fact that this Court has in
certain cases given expression to the view that any lapse on
the  part   of	the   State  Government	 in  forwarding	 the
representation made for revo-
794
cation of  his order  of detention  under s.11(1)(b)  of the
COFEPOSA Act,  1974 or the failure of the Central Government
to expeditiously  consider the	same was  a  denial  of	 the
constitutional	right	of  being   afforded  "the  earliest
opportunity of making a representation against the order" as
contemplated by	 Art. 22(5). At one time it was thought that
s. 14  of the  Maintenance of  Internal Security  Act,	1971
which was  in pari  materia with  s. 14	 of the Act, did not
confer any  right or  privilege on the detenu but there is a
definite shift	in the	judicial attitude,  for which  there
appears to  be no discernible basis. In Shyam Ambalal Siroya
v. Union  of India & Ors., the contention was that because a
representation properly	 addressed to the Central Government
to order  revocation under s. 11 of the COFEPOSA Act was not
forwarded  by	the  detaining	 authority  to	the  Central
Government, the	 detention was	illegal. The Court construed
the power  conferred on	 the Central  Government  to  direct
revocation of  an order of detention under s. 11 of that Act
to be  "statutory". It	was observed  that the	power of the
Central Government  to revoke the order of detention implies
that the  detenu can  make a  representation for exercise of
that power  and a  petition for	 revocation of	an order  of
detention should  be dealt with reasonable expedition. Since
a representation  properly addressed  by the  detenu of	 the
Central	 Government   was  not	 forwarded  to	the  Central
Government, the	 continued detention  of the detenu was held
to be illegal.
 In Sabir Ahmed v. Union of India & Ors., the Court held
that  non-consideration	 by  the  Central  Government  of  a
representation for revocation made by the detenu under s. 11
of the	COFEPOSA Act made the continued detention to be bad,
following the  decision	 in  Shyam  Ambalal  Siroya's  case,
supra. It  was however	observed that the power conferred by
s. 11  on the Central Government was a supervisory power and
it was	intended to  be an  additional	check  or  safeguard
against the  improper exercise	of its power of detention by
the detaining authority or the State Government.
 In Rattan	Singh v.  State of  Punjab &  Ors, the Court
went still  further. There was, in that case, a lapse on the
part   of   the	  State	  Government   in   forwarding	 the
representation simultaneously  made by	the  detenu  to	 the
Central Government  for revocation of the order of detention
under s. 11 of the COFEPOSA Act. The
795
Court struck  down the order of detention on the ground that
there was  a denial of the right of making representation to
the Central  Government	 for  revocation  of  the  order  of
detention under	 s. 11 of the Act and this was tantamount to
a denial of the constitutional safeguard of Art. 22(5).
     Soon thereafter,  the Court  in Sat  Pal  v.  State  of
Punjab &  Ors examined the nature of the power of revocation
conferred on  the Central  Government under  s.	 11  of	 the
COFEPOSA; Act  and held	 that it  was supervisory in nature,
and it was observed:
	  "That is,  as it  should  be,	 under	our  federal
     structure the Centre must always keep a vigilant eye in
     the matter	 of life and liberty of a citizen guaranteed
     under Article 21.
	  Ours	is   a	Constitution,	where  there   is  a
     combination of  federal structure with unitary features
     while in  a unitary State there is only one Government;
     federal  State   involves	 multi-Governments   namely,
     national or  federal Government  and the Governments of
     component States.	A federal  State,  in  short,  is  a
     fusion of	several States into a single State in regard
     to	 matters  affecting  common  interest  leaving	each
     component State  to enjoy	autonomy in  regard to other
     matters. Under our Constitution: certain powers vest in
     the Central Government leaving certain to its component
     units to  exercise autonomy in spheres assigned to them
     in the  Constitution itself. The component States are .
     not  merely   delegates  or   agents  of	the  federal
     Government. Both  federal and  State  Governments	draw
     their authority  from the same source, the Constitution
     The conferment  of executive  power on  the  States  in
     relation  to  a  subject  with  respect  to  which	 the
     legislatures of  the States have no power to make a law
     under Art.	 258(2) must  necessarily be  subject to the
     administrative control of the Union under Arts. 256 and
     247(1), to	 the giving of such directions to the States
     as	 may  appear  to  the  Government  of  India  to  be
     necessary for that purpose."
     It	 was   then   observed	 that	the   constitutional
imperatives  of	 Art.  22(5)  enjoin  that  where  a  detenu
simultaneously makes a re-
796
presentation to	 the  detaining	 authority  as	well  as  an
application for	 revocation under s. 11 of the Act they must
both be dealt with by the appropriate Government at the same
time  and   there  was	 no  question  of  any	conflict  of
jurisdiction. To illustrate, it was said that if the Central
Government were	 to revoke an order of detention under s. 11
of the	Act, there  would be no representation for the State
Government to consider, or refer the Advisory Board under s.
8(b), nor  will there  arise any  question of Advisory Board
submitting a  report to	 it, or	 on receipt of such a report
confirming the	order of  detention under  s. 8(f).  It	 was
further observed  that the  other types	 of cases  would  be
where notwithstanding  that the	 order of detention has been
confirmed under	 s. 8(f), the appropriate Government may, at
any time,  revoke the  same under  s. 11  of the Act. It was
accordingly held  that the  power of revocation conferred on
the appropriate Government under s. 11 is independent of the
power of  confirming or	 setting aside an order of detention
under s. 8(f).
     As to  the nature	of the power of revocation conferred
on the	Central Government  under s. 11 of the COFEPOSA Act,
it was stated:
	  "The making  of an  application for  revocation to
     the Central  Government under  s.	11  of	the  Act  is
     therefore part  of the  constitutional right  a citizen
     has against  this detention  under a  law	relating  to
     preventive detention. While Art. 22(5) contemplates the
     making  of	  a  representation  against  the  order  of
     detention to  the detaining  authority, which has to be
     referred by  the appropriate Government to the Advisory
     Board constituted under s. 8(a) of the Act, Parliament,
     has in  its wisdom,  enacted s.  11  and  conferred  an
     additional	 safeguard   against   arbitrary   executive
     action.
     The principle  that emerges from all these decisions is
that the  power	 of  revocation	 conferred  on	the  Central
Government under s. 14 of the Act is a statutory power which
may be	exercised on  information received  by	the  Central
Government from	 its own  source including  that supplied by
the State  Government under  sub-s. (5)	 of s. 3 or from the
detenu in  the form  of a  petition or representation. It is
for the	 Central Government  to decide	whether	 or  not  it
should revoke the order of detention in a particular
797
case, In  the present  case, the  detenu was not deprived of
the right  of  making  a  representation  to  the  detaining
authority under	 Art. 22(5) of the Constitution read with s.
8(1) of	 the Act.  Although  the  detenu  had  no  right  to
simultaneously make  a representation  against the  order of
detention to  the Central  Government under  Art. 22(5)	 and
there was  no duty  cast on  the State Government to forward
the same  to the  Central Government, nevertheless the State
Government  forward   the  same	  forthwith.   The   Central
Government duly	 considered  that  representation  which  in
effect was  nothing but	 a Representation  for revocation of
the order  of detention	 under s.  14 of the Act. That being
so, it	was not	 obligatory  on	 the  part  of	the  Central
Government  to	 consider  a   second	representation	 for
revocation under s. 14. We may profitably refer to Phillippa
Anne  Duke's   case,  supra,   where  in   somewhat  similar
circumstances it  was  held  that  failure  of	the  Central
Government to consider a representation for revocation of an
order of  detention under  s. 11(1)(b)	of the	COFEPOSA Act
handed over  to t  he Prime  Minister during  her  visit  to
England did  not render	 the continued detention invalid. It
was observed:
	  "Representations from whatever source addressed to
     whomsoever officer	 of one	 or other  department of the
     Government cannot be treated as a representation to the
     Government under s. 11(8)(b) of the COFEPOSA Act."
     The result therefore is that the appeal succeeds and is
allowed. The  judgment and  order of  the High	Court is set
aside and  the order  of detention  passed by  the  District
Magistrate under sub-s. (3) of s. 3 of the National Security
Act, 1980 is maintained.
S.R.					     Appeal allowed.
798




