

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
J. K. Bharati vs State Of Maharashtra And Ors on 23 July, 1984Equivalent citations: 1984 AIR 1542, 1985 SCR  (1) 201
Author: O C Reddy
Bench: Reddy, O. Chinnappa (J)
           PETITIONER:
J. K. BHARATI

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF MAHARASHTRA AND ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT23/07/1984

BENCH:
REDDY, O. CHINNAPPA (J)
BENCH:
REDDY, O. CHINNAPPA (J)
SEN, A.P. (J)
VENKATARAMIAH, E.S. (J)

CITATION:
 1984 AIR 1542		  1985 SCR  (1) 201
 1984 SCC  (3) 704	  1984 SCALE  (2)53


ACT:
     Constitution of  India 1950,  Article 14,	Entry 40  of
List 1	of Schedule  VII and Entry 34 of List 11 of Schedule
VII and	 The Bombay  Lotteries (Control	 and Tax)  and Prize
Competition (Tax) Act 1958, Section 32 (c).
     Lotteries-'lotteries authorised  but not  organised  by
the government	of other  states-Ban on sale of such lottery
tickets-Whether	  competent-Whether    any    discrimination
involved.



HEADNOTE:
     The petitioner  in their  writ petitions  to this Court
contested the  ban on  sale within the State of Maharashtra,
of tickets  of lottories  organised by	the Indian Red-Cross
Society, Dadra and Nagar Haveli branch and authorised by the
administration of Dadra and Nagar Haveli.
     Dismissing the writ petitions,
^
     HELD: (1)	(i) The	 Bombay Lotteries  (Control and tax)
and Prize  Competition (Tax)  Act, 1958 is an Act to control
and tax	 lotteries and	prize competition  in the  State  of
Maharashtra. The  Act contains	detailed provisions  for the
licensing, regulation  and control  of	lottery	 within	 the
State of  Maharashtra. Section	32(c), provides that nothing
in the Act shall apply to "a lottery specially authorised by
the State Government." [203G-H]
     (ii)  In  the  case  of  lotteries	 authorised  by	 the
Government of Maharashtra, the Government of Maharashtra may
retain to itself all necessary powers for the regulation and
control	 and   the  prevention	 of  misuse   of  fund	 and
exploitation of guileless members of the public. In the case
of lotteries authorised by the Government of other States it
may be	difficult and  even impossible for the Government of
Maharashtra to	take adequate  regulatory steps	 to  prevent
abuse of  the authority given by Governments of other States
to non-Governmental  agencies to  organize lotteries. It may
be equally  difficult for the Governments of other States to
take
202
adequate measures  for prevention of abuse of such authority
within the State of Maharashtra. [204C-D]
     2. No  hostile discrimination  whatever is	 involved in
not extending  the exemption  from the	applicability of the
Bombay Lotteries  (Control and	Tax) and  Prize	 Competition
(Tax) Act,  1958 'to  lotteries authorised but not organized
by the Government of other States'. [204D]
     3. Lotteries  organised by	 the Government	 of India or
the Government	of the	State have been taken out from Entry
34 of  List II	of Schedule VII by Entry 40 of List 1. There
is, therefore  no  question  about  the	 competence  of	 the
Legislature of	Maharashtra to	legislate in  respect of the
sale or	 distribution,	in  the	 State	of  Maharashtra,  of
tickets of  all lotteries organized by any agency whatsoever
other than  the Government  of India  or the Government of a
State. [203E-F]
     H. Anraj and others v. State of Maharashtra, explained.



JUDGMENT:
     ORIGINAL  JURISDICTION:   Writ  Petition  (Civil)	Nos.
12820, 12592,12714,  12736, 12747,12821,13035  and 13022  of
1984.
      (Under Article 32 of the Constitution of India).
     Dr. Y.  S. Chitale, Vimal Dave, Randhir Singh O. Swamy,
Vineet Kumar,  N. K. Sharma, Ms. Deepika Saxena. S. M. Ashri
and M. Veerappa for the Petitioners.
     N. H. Gursahani and M. N. Shroff for the Respondent.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     CHINNAPPA	REDDY,	 J.  This   order  is	virtually  a
postscript to our judgment in H. Anraj and Ors. v.  State of
Maharashtra What  was in  question in  H. Anraj	 and Ors. v.
State of  Maharashtra was  the ban imposed by the Government
of Maharashtra on the sale of tickets of lotteries conducted
by  the	  Government  of   other  States  in  the  State  of
Maharashtra. What  is presently	 in  question  in  the	writ
petitions before  us is	 the ban  on the  sale of tickets of
lotteries authorised but not organized by the Governments of
other States. Specifically, we are concerned with the ban on
sale,  within  the  State  of  Maharashtra,  of	 tickets  of
lotteries organised  by the  Indian Red Cross Society, Dadra
and Nagar Haveli branch and authorised by the administration
of Dadra  and Nagar  Haveli. In	 Anraj and  Ors. v. State of
Maharashtra we held that the subject"
203
"Lotteries organised  by the  Government  of  India  or	 the
Government  of	 a  State"  had	 been  taken  out  from	 the
legislative field,  comprised by the expression "Betting and
Gambling" in  Entry 34	of List	 II of	Schedule VII and was
reserved to  be dealt  with by	Parliament under Entry 40 of
List I	of Schedule  VII. Even	so, we held, Art. 298 of the
Constitution left the Government of a State free to carry on
any trade  or business	in respect  of which it may not have
the power  to make laws, but that the power to carry on such
trade  or  business  shall  be	subject	 to  legislation  by
Parliament.  Therefore,	  we  said,   in  the	absence	  of
Parliamentary legislation, the Government of every State had
the unrestricted  right to organise lotteries and this right
was not	 subject to the executive power of the Government of
India or  the executive	 and  legislative  powers  of  other
States.	 Consequently,	 we  held  that	 the  Government  of
Maharashtra did	 not have  the right  to impose a ban on the
sale and  distribution of  tickets of lotteries organised by
other States  in the  State of	Maharashtra. In	 the instant
cases, we  are concerned  not  with  the  ban  on  lotteries
organised by  the Governments  of other	 States but with the
ban  on	  lotteries  authorised	  by  such  Governments	 and
organised  by	institutions  and  persons  other  than	 the
Governments. The  source of  power is not in question. It is
to be  found in	 Entry 34  of List  II of Schedule VII which
empowers the  State legislature	 to make  laws in respect of
"Betting and  Gambling", which	expression has	always	been
held to	 include the  conduct of  lotteries. While lotteries
organised by  the Government of India or the Government of a
State have been taken out of Entry 34 of List II of Schedule
VII by	Entry 40  of List  I, there is no question about the
competence of the Legislature of Maharashtra to legislate in
respect of  the	 sale  or  distribution,  in  the  State  of
Maharashtra, of	 tickets of  all lotteries  organised by any
agency whatsoever  other than the Government of India or the
Government of a State.
     The  Bombay  Lotteries  (Control  and  Tax)  and  Prize
Competition (Tax)  Act, 1958  is an  Act to  control and tax
lotteries and prize competition in the State of Maharashtra.
Section 3 of the Act declares: "Save as provided by the Act,
all lotteries  are  unlawful."	The  Act  contains  detailed
provisions for	the licensing,	regulation  and	 control  of
lotteries within State of Maharashtra. By Sec. 32 (c), it is
provided that  nothing in  the Act shall apply to "a lottery
specially  authorised	by  the	  State	  Government."	 The
submission  of	 Dr.  Chitale,	 learned  counsel   for	 the
petitioners, was  that the  exemption from the applicability
of the	Act granted  to lotteries  "especially authorised by
the State Government", that is, by the
204
Government of Maharashtra, was discriminatory; the exemption
should be  extended  to	 all  lotteries	 authorised  by	 the
Government of  any  State  whatsoever.	Article	 14  of	 the
Constitution is invoked in aid of the submission; the reason
for exempting  lotteries authorised  by	 the  Government  of
Maharashtra from  the  applicability  of  the  Act  and	 not
lotteries authorised  by the  Governments of other States is
patent.	 In   the  case	  of  lotteries	 authorised  by	 the
Government of Maharashtra, the Government of Maharashtra may
retain to itself all necessary powers for the regulation and
control	 and   the  prevention	 of  misuse   of  funds	 and
exploitation of guileless members of the public. In the case
of lotteries  authorised by  the Governments of other States
it may	be difficult  and even impossible for the Government
of Maharashtra	to take adequate regulatory steps to prevent
abuse of  the authority given by Governments of other States
to non-Governmental  agencies to  organise lotteries. It may
be equally  difficult for the Governments of other States to
take adequate  measures for  prevention	 of  abuse  of	such
authority  within   the	 State	 of  Maharashtra.   We	are,
therefore, satisfied that no hostile discrimination whatever
is  involved   in  not	extending  the	exemption  from	 the
applicability of  the Act  to lotteries	 authorised but	 not
organised by  the Governments  of  other  States.  The	Writ
Petitions are accordingly, dismissed with costs.
N.V.K.					 Petition dismissed.
205




