

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Shantilal Manganlal And Anr vs Chunnilal Ranchoddas Through ... on 24 July, 1984Equivalent citations: 1984 AIR 1578, 1985 SCR  (1) 205
Author: O C Reddy
Bench: Reddy, O. Chinnappa (J)
           PETITIONER:
SHANTILAL MANGANLAL AND ANR.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
CHUNNILAL RANCHODDAS THROUGH LRS. AND ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT24/07/1984

BENCH:
REDDY, O. CHINNAPPA (J)
BENCH:
REDDY, O. CHINNAPPA (J)
MADON, D.P.

CITATION:
 1984 AIR 1578		  1985 SCR  (1) 205
 1984 SCC  (4) 236	  1984 SCALE  (2)61


ACT:
     Petition for  Special Leave  and Petition for Review-If
the petition filed without giving the grounds of appeal they
will be	 dismissed as  frivolous and an abuse of the process
of law-Order  XVI and XL of Supreme Court Rules 1966-Duty of
advocate to court in filing petitions.



HEADNOTE:
     An	 application   for  review   against  the  order  of
dismissal of  the Special  Leave Petition  dated 9.12.83 was
filled without	disclosing any	ground for  review.  It	 was
averred that the petition was being filed so as to be within
the limitation	prescribed under  Order XL  of	the  Supreme
Court Rules  and that  further grounds	would  be  filed  if
advised. However,  nothing was	done though  more  than	 six
months had elapsed by the date of hearing.
     Dismissing	  the	 petition,   expressing	  its	deep
dissatisfaction and  anguish with  the indiscriminate manner
in which  petitions for	 Special  Leave	 and  petitions	 for
Review were being filed in the Supreme Court, [206A]
^
     HELD: The	application for	 review was nothing short of
an abuse of the process of the court, a waste of the time of
the Court and was entirely frivolous.



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Review  Petition No. 249
of 1984.
			     In
     Special Leave Petition (C) No. 13618 of 1983
     CHAMBER MATTER-By Circulation
     The order of the Court was delivered by
     CHINNAPPA REDDY,  J. This	application  for  Review  is
nothing
206
short of  an abuse of the process of the Court and  waste of
the time  of this  Court, time	which has now become so dear
and precious  because of  the  daily  mounting	arrears.  No
ground for  seeking a  review is mentioned or even hinted at
in the	petition. In  the first paragraph of the petition it
is stated  "This is  an application  for Review of the order
dated 9.12.83,	whereby this  Hon'ble Court  was pleased  to
dismiss the  above Special Leave to Appeal (Civil). The said
order discloses	 an error apparent on the face of the record
as will	 be clear  from perusal	 of the	 various grounds and
facts mentioned in the petition for Special Leave to Appeal.
It is  submitted that  since the  order is  unsustainable in
view of	 the facts  and	 circumstances	of  the	 case,	this
Hon'ble Court  may be  pleased to  review the order". In the
second paragraph  we are  told that no detailed grounds have
been taken  (though in	point of fact not a single ground is
even mentioned)	 as limitation is about to expire and "If so
advised, further  set of  grounds would be submitted for the
consideration of  the Hon'ble  Court" The petition was filed
on 9.1.1984  and nothing  has been done though more than six
months have  passed since  then. The  offer to file detailed
grounds remains	 an  unredeemed	 promise.  Possibly  he	 was
advised to  file no  further grounds as there was none to be
submitted. Good	 words were not to be thrown away after bad.
To that	 extent, we  may consider  ourselves spared. We must
however express	 our deep  dissatisfaction and	anguish with
the indiscriminate  manner in  which petitions	for  special
leave and  petitions for review are being filed. The present
application  is	  entirely  frivolous	and  is	 accordingly
dismissed.
S. R.					 Petition dismissed.
207




