

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Chhotelal Pyarelalthe ... vs Shikharchand on 27 July, 1984Equivalent citations: 1984 AIR 1570, 1985 SCR  (1) 268
Author: P Bhagwati
Bench: Bhagwati, P.N.
           PETITIONER:
CHHOTELAL PYARELALTHE PARENERSHIP FIRM AND ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
SHIKHARCHAND

DATE OF JUDGMENT27/07/1984

BENCH:
BHAGWATI, P.N.
BENCH:
BHAGWATI, P.N.
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)

CITATION:
 1984 AIR 1570		  1985 SCR  (1) 268
 1984 SCC  (4) 343	  1984 SCALE  (2)125
 CITATOR INFO :
 F	    1989 SC 865	 (3)


ACT:
     Central Provinces	and Berar Letting of Houses and Rent
Control Order  1949, Clause  13(3) (vi)	 and  (vii)-Eviction
Application against  partnership firm  in the  firm name  as
respondent-Whether  maintainable-Non-joinder   of  partners-
Whether misdescription and can be corrected.
     Code of  Civil Procedure,	1908,O.30-Whether applies to
proceedings under  C.P. and Berar Letting of Houses and Rent
Control Order, 1949.



HEADNOTE:
     In	 an   eviction	application,  filed  by	 respondent-
landlord against  the  appellant-a  partnership	 firm  under
Clause 13(3)  (vi) and	(vii) of  the Central  Provinces and
Berar Letting  of Houses  and Rent  Control Order, 1949 (HRC
Order  for   short)  the   appellant  raised  a	 preliminary
objection that	the application against the partnership firm
was  not   maintainable	 without  joining  its	partners  as
respondents. The  High Court  ultimately held  that such  an
application for	 eviction was maintainable. Hence the appeal
to this Court.
     Allowing the  appeal and remitting the case back to the
Rent Controller,
^
     HELD: (1)	It is  only by	virtue of  the provisions of
Order 30  of the Code of Civil Procedure that a firm can sue
and be	sued in	 its own  name without	the  partners  being
impleading  co-nominee.	  But,	since	the  Code  of  Civil
Procedure does not apply to proceedings under the HRC Order,
no  application	  for  eviction	  under	 HRC  order  can  be
maintained against a firm in the firm name. [270D-E]
     (2) The  firm is  merely a	 compendious  name  for	 the
partners consti-
269
tuting it  and an eviction application filed under HRC Order
against a  partnership	firm  without  joining	any  partner
constituting the  firm as  a respondent	 to the	 application
would be  merely a case of misdescription of the respondents
to the	application and this misdescription can be corrected
at any stage of the proceedings. [270E-F]
     (3)  In   the  instant  case,  the	 Court	allowed	 the
respondent to amend the title of the original application by
adding the  names of  the partners of the appellant firm and
remitted the case back to the case Rent Controller for early
disposal on merits. [270H; 271A]



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION : Civil Appeal No. 3027 of
1984
     Appeal by	Special leave  from the	 Judgment and  Order
dated the 9th day of April, 1984 of the Bombay High Court in
W.P. No. 51 of 1979.
     U.R. Lalit and Mrs. J. Wad for the Appellants.
     V.A. Bobde and A.G. Ratnaparkhi for the Respondent.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     BHAGWATI, J.  The respondent filed an application under
clauses 13  (3) (vi) and (vii) of the C.P. and Berar Letting
of Houses  and	Rent  Control  Order  of  1949	(hereinafter
referred to  as HRC Order) to evict petitioner No. 1 firm of
M/s. Chhotelal	Pyarelal. The  respondent alleged  that	 the
firm was a tenant in respect of the premises and eviction of
the firm  was sought  on the ground of bona fide requirement
of the	respondent for	the purpose  of his occupation under
paragraph (vi)	as also	 for the purpose of making essential
repairs under  paragraph (vii)	of Clause 13(3). The firm of
Chhotelal Pyarelal  raised a  preliminary contention that no
application could  be maintained  against a partnership firm
and such  an application  was liable  to be  rejected.	This
contention ultimately  came to	be considered  by a  learned
single Judge of the High Court at Nagpur. The learned single
Judge being  under  the	 impression  that  there  was  still
operative a  judgment of  another single  Judge of  the High
Court taking  the view	that such  an application  against a
partnership  firm   was	 not   maintainable,  referred	this
question to  a larger  Bench. This question accordingly came
up before a Division
270
Bench of  the High  Court. It  was pointed  out	 before	 the
Division Bench that undoubtedly a view was at one time taken
by a  learned single  Judge that an application for eviction
against a  partnership firm  was not  maintainable but	this
view was over ruled by a Division Bench of the High Court in
a Letters  Patent appeal  filed against	 that decision.	 The
Division Bench	accordingly held  that	an  application	 for
eviction under	the HRC	 Order was  maintainable  against  a
partnership firm  without joining  any partner	constituting
the partnership	 firm as  a respondent	to the	application.
This view  taken by  the Division  Bench is  assailed in the
present appeal	filed by the firm of M/s. Chhotelal Pyarelal
with special leave obtained from this Court.
     Now, there can be no doubt that since the Code of Civil
Procedure does not apply to proceedings under the HRC Order,
no application for eviction can be maintained against a firm
in the	firm name. The firm is merely a compendious name for
the partners constituting it and it is only by virtue of the
provisions of Order 30 of the Code of Civil Procedure that a
firm can  sue and  be sued  in	its  own  name	without	 the
partners being	impleaded co-nominee.  It is therefore clear
that the  firm of  M/s, Chhotelal Pyarelal could not be sued
in the	firm name  by  the  respondent	in  so	far  as	 the
application for	 eviction under the HRC Order was concerned.
But we	agree with the Division Bench of the High Court that
this cannot  by	 itself	 result	 in  the  dismissal  of	 the
application. It	 would be merely a case of misdescription of
the respondents	 to the	 application and this misdescription
can be	corrected at any stage of the proceedings. There can
be no  doubt that  the partners	 of the	 firm are before the
Court though in a wrong name.
     The learned  counsel appearing  for the respondent has,
therefore, applied  to us for leave to amend the cause title
of the	original application  by adding	 the  names  of	 the
partners  of   the  firm   of  M/s   Chhotelal	Pyarelal  as
respondents along  with the  firm of  M/s Chhotelal Pyarelal
and carrying  out necessary  consequential amendments in the
body of	 the  application.  We	allow  the  application	 for
amendment and  remit the case back to the Rent Controller so
that he	 may dispose  it of  on merits.	 The respondent will
carry out  the amendment  in the  application  for  eviction
within two  weeks from	the date of receipt of this Order by
the Rent  Controller and  the newly  added respondents	will
file their written statement in answer to the
271
application for	 eviction within  a further  period of	four
weeks thereafter.  The Rent  Controller will then proceed to
dispose of  the application for eviction as expeditiously as
possible and  in any event before the expiration of a period
of 6  months. There  will be  no order	as to  costs of	 the
appeal.
M.L.A.	  Appeal allowed.
272
