

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Nasirul Haque vs Jitendra Nath Dey on 24 August, 1984Equivalent citations: 1984 AIR 1799, 1985 SCR  (1) 638
Author: S M Fazalali
Bench: Fazalali, Syed Murtaza
           PETITIONER:
NASIRUL HAQUE

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
JITENDRA NATH DEY

DATE OF JUDGMENT24/08/1984

BENCH:
FAZALALI, SYED MURTAZA
BENCH:
FAZALALI, SYED MURTAZA
THAKKAR, M.P. (J)

CITATION:
 1984 AIR 1799		  1985 SCR  (1) 638
 1984 SCC  (4) 498	  1984 SCALE  (2)383


ACT:
     Finding of	 Facts-High Court  calling for	a finding of
facts from  the trial  court bypassing	the appellate court-
Whether conclusive  and immune	from the  scrutiny of Highly
Court in a second appeal.
     Bihar Buildings  (Lease, Rent  & Eviction) Control Act,
1977-Proviso to sec. 12 (1) (c)-Partial Eviction-Scope of



HEADNOTE:
     In	 a  second  appeal  filed  by  the  appellant-tenant
against an  eviction order,  the  High	Court  remanded	 the
matter to  the trial  court and	 called for a finding on the
question  of   partial	eviction.   The	 trial	court  while
recording its  finding was  of the view that the question of
partial eviction  should be  considered in  the light of the
requirement of the landlord-respondent as deposed to by him.
The High  Court accepted  the finding  of  the	trial  court
without	  scrutinising	 it   and   dismissed	the   appeal
accordingly. Hence this appeal by special leave.
     Allowing the appeal.
^
     HEID: (1)	The High  Court should	have scrutinised the
finding of  the trial  court with  special reference  to the
question of partial eviction even on facts as the finding of
the trial  court standing  on  its  own	 (not  confirmed  by
appellate court) is not conclusive on facts even in a second
appeal. This  is so  because the High Court had called for a
finding	 of   facts  from  the	trial  court  bypassing	 the
appellate court and thus deprived the right of appeal to the
District Judge	(last court  on facts)	which might not have
agreed with the trial court. [640 A-B]
     (2) The High Court as well as the trial court failed to
take into  account the	Proviso to section 12 (1) (c) of the
Bihar Buildings	 (Lease, Rent  & Eviction) Control Act 1977,
which provides, inter alia, that where the court thinks that
the  reasonable	  requirement  of  such	 occupation  may  be
substantially satisfied	 by evicting  the tenant from a part
only of	 the building  and allowing  the tenant	 to continue
occupation of  the  rest  and  the  tenant  agrees  to	such
occupation, the	 Court	shall  pass  a	decree	accordingly.
Therefore, the court has, to determine;
639
     (i) the  extent of	 the  premises	which  the  landlord
"reasonably" requires.	Determine it  objectively and not on
the basis  of his ipse dixit or his mere desire to occupy as
much as	 he wants;  and (ii) whether such requirement as the
court  considers   reasonable,	 will	be   'substantially'
satisfied  (not	  fully	 satisfied)   by  ordering   partial
eviction. [639 G-H]
     The Court remanded the case to the High Court to decide
the question afresh after considering the evidence on record
in the light of the aforesaid observations. [640-F]



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 3482 of
1984.
     Appeal by	Special Leave  from the	 Judgment and  Order
dated the  8th May,  1984 of  the Patna High Court in Second
Appeal No. 182 of 1978.
     Jayanarayan, Miss S. Agarwal D.S. Mehra and R. P. Singh
for the Appellant.
     Lal Narain Sinha and D. P. Mukharji for the Respondent.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
FAZAL ALI.  J. After  hearing counsel for the parties we are
clearly of  the view  that the	judgment of  the High  Court
cannot be sustained for two reasons. Firstly, the High Court
had earlier  remanded the case to the trial court and called
for a  finding from  the trial	court  on  the	question  of
partial	 eviction.  The	 trial	court  while  recording	 its
finding was  of	 the  view  that  the  question	 of  partial
eviction  should   be  considered   in	the   light  of	 the
requirement of	the landlord  as deposed to by him. In doing
so, the	 High Court  failed to take into account the proviso
to Section  12 (1)  (c) of the Bihar Building (Lease, Rent &
Eviction) Control  Act of  1977, which in terms enjoins that
what is	 necessary to  be  considered  is  the	'reasonable'
requirement  of	  the  landlord	 and  whether  it  would  be
'Substantially' satisfied by evicting the tenant from a part
only of	 the premises. The Court has therefore, in the first
instance, to  determine the extent of the premises which the
landlord "reasonably" requires. Determine it objectively and
not on	the basis  of his  ipse dixit  or his mere desire to
occupy as much as he wants. But the Court has to furthermore
apply a	 test as  to whether  such requirement, as the Court
considers reasonable, will be 'substantially' satisfied (not
fully satisfied)  by ordering  partial eviction.  This vital
aspect has been
640
altogether overlooked  by the  trial court.  Secondly, since
the High  Court had  directly called  for a finding from the
trial court  itself, the  High Court should have scrutinized
the said  finding with	special reference to the question of
partial eviction  even on  facts as the finding of the trial
court standing on its own (not confirmed by appellate court)
is not	conclusive on facts even in a second appeal. This is
so because  the High  Court had called for a finding of fact
from the  trial court bypassing the appellate court and thus
deprived the  right of	appeal to  the District	 Judge (last
court on  facts) which,	 for aught  we know,  might not have
agreed with  the trial	court and  may have  considered	 the
question from the point of view indicated by us, viz, giving
full effect  to the  concept of	 reasonable  extent  of	 the
requirement   from   the   perspective	 of   'substantials'
satisfaction  of   such	 requirement  as  considered  to  be
reasonable objectively.	 Only in  case	the  District  Judge
would have  agreed with	 the finding of the trial court then
it may	have become  a finding	of fact which was binding on
the High  Court in second appeal. Besides the question as to
the connotation	 of the	 word  'substantial'  was  itself  a
substantial point  of law  there being	no decision  of	 the
Patna High  Court on  this specific  point.  Other  Acts  in
various States	do not	embody the  concept of "substantial"
satisfaction. These  decision would therefore be of no avail
in the	context of  the facts  of the present case. In these
circumstances, it  cannot be  said that	 the finding  of the
trial court,  which is	not the	 final court  on  facts,  is
conclusive and	immune from  the scrutiny  of the High Court
even in	 a second  appeal. We  therefore, allow	 appeal, set
aside the  decree of  the High	Court and remand the case to
the  High   Court  to	decide	the   question	fresh  after
considering the	 evidence on  record in	 the  light  of	 the
aforesaid  observations.   The	 appeal	  is   disposed	  of
accordingly.
     In the  meantime there  will be  stay of dispossession.
The High  Court is  requested to expedite the hearing of the
case.
M.L.A.					      Appeal allowed
641




