

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Dr. Muneeb Ul Rehman Haroon And Ors vs Government Of Jammu And Kashmir ... on 13 August, 1984Equivalent citations: 1984 AIR 1585, 1985 SCR  (1) 344
Author: Y Chandrachud
Bench: Chandrachud, Y.V. ((Cj)
           PETITIONER:
DR. MUNEEB UL REHMAN HAROON AND ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
GOVERNMENT OF JAMMU AND KASHMIR STATE AND ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT13/08/1984

BENCH:
CHANDRACHUD, Y.V. ((CJ)
BENCH:
CHANDRACHUD, Y.V. ((CJ)
VARADARAJAN, A. (J)
SEN, AMARENDRA NATH (J)

CITATION:
 1984 AIR 1585		  1985 SCR  (1) 344
 1984 SCC  (4)	24	  1984 SCALE  (2)180


ACT:
     Constitution of India 1950, Articles 14 and 19
     Medical Colleges-No  admissions made  to  Post-Graduate
medical course	for three  consecutive	semesters-Action  of
authorities whether  arbitrary and  violative of fundamental
rights.
     Practice	and    Procedure-Mala	fides-Plea   of-Bald
assertion in writ petition-Insufficient-Specific facts to be
alleged.



HEADNOTE:
     The petitioners  in the  writ  petitions  were  medical
graduates who  applied for  admission to  the  Post-graduate
course in  the Medical	College, Srinagar  for the  semester
beginning in  July 1970,  appeared for	an entrance test but
the result  was not  declared officially.  They contended in
their writ  petitions that  the refusal of the Government to
admit any  student at  all for	the Post-Graduate course for
the three  semesters which  commenced in July 1980, November
1980 and  July 1981  was violative of the fundamental rights
guaranteed under  Articles 14  and 19  of the  Constitution,
besides being mala fide.
     The  State	 Government  contested	the  writ  petitions
contending that	 the rules  which were in operation in July,
1980  governing	  admission  to	 the  Post-Graduate  Medical
Course, were prejudicial to the interests of the students of
Jammu Medical  College and  were to an extent discriminatory
and that  was why  no admissions  were made to the July 1980
semester, that	the amendment of the rules of admission were
initiated so  as  to  bring  them  in  conformity  with	 the
requirements of	 the Constitution, and that this took a long
period of 18 months.
     Dismissing the writ petitions,
345
^
     HELD :  There is no violation of any of the fundamental
rights of  the petitioners  nor is  the action	of the State
authorities arbitrary or mala fide. [348C]
     Mala fides	 cannot be  assumed  while  dealing  with  a
question which	has far-reaching  consequences. No  specific
facts have  been alleged on the basis of which a finding can
be recorded  that the  decision not  to admit any student at
all for	 three consecutive  semesters was actuated by a mala
fide intention on the part of the State Government. There is
only a bald assertion in the writ petitions that a total ban
was placed  on admission  to the three consecutive semesters
in order to favour some persons. [347H-348A]
     In the instant case, until the year 1973 there was only
one Medical  College in	 the State of Jammu & Kashmir, which
was at Srinagar. The Medical College at Jammu was started in
1973. The  Jammu Medical College was affiliated to the Jammu
University while the Srinagar Medical College was affiliated
to Kashmir  University. The statutes of Jammu University did
not correspond to the statutes of the Kashmir University for
admission  to  the  Post-graduate  course,  thereby  causing
discrimination	 in   favour   of   those   fulfilling	 the
requirements under the statutes of the Kashmir University as
against those  eligible under  the  statutes  of  the  Jammu
University. That  was why,  the State Government had to take
action for  curing the	defects which  were inherent  in the
prevailing procedure  for  selection  to  the  Post-Graduate
Medical Course	in the	two medical  colleges.	The  Kashmir
University statute was amended so as to introduce uniformity
in the rules of admission. According to clause 3 of the 1980
Notice of  Admission, it was necessary for the candidates to
have completed	one  year's  Compulsory	 House	Job  in	 the
concerned speciality,  as provided  in the  statutes of	 the
Kashmir University.  Under the amended provisions which came
into force  in 1981  candidates had  to complete one years's
House Job  in a	 recognised  institution  in  the  concerned
subject or  six months'	 House Job  in the concerned subject
and six	 months' House Job in an allied subject. The amended
rule conforms  to the rule which prevailed in other parts of
the country  and was  in accordance  with recommendations of
the Medical Council of India. [347C-G]



JUDGMENT:
     ORIGINAL JURISDICTION  : Writ  Petition No. 1742 & 3129
of 1981.
     Under article 32 of the Constitution of India.
     Vimal Dave for the Petitioner.
346
     Altaf Ahmed for the Respondent.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     CHANDRACHUD,  J.	These	Writ   Petitions   are	 not
maintainable under  article 32	of the	Constitution because
they do	 not involve  the violation of any fundamental right
of the petitioners. The petitioners applied for admission to
the Medical  College, Srinagar, for the Post-graduate Course
of the Kashmir University for the semester beginning in July
1980. They  appeared for  an entrance test but the result of
that test  was not declared officially. The petitioners seem
to possess  information to  the effect,	 and  they  have  so
alleged in  their petitions, that they have passed the test.
No admissions were made either to the July, 1980 semester or
to the	two following  semesters beginning in November, 1980
and July  1981. An  entrance test  was held for admission to
the semester  beginning in  November 1981  and the result of
the test  has been announced. We are informed that 16 out of
17 petitioners in these two Writ Petitions appeared for that
test.
     There is  a vague	averment in  the petitions  that the
refusal of  the Government  to admit  any student at all for
the July,  1980 semester  is violative	of the	petitioners'
fundamental  rights   under  articles	14  and	 19  of	 the
Constitution and  is also  mala fide.  We are  unable to see
how. The  petitioners have  not been  picked and  chosen for
hostile	 treatment   as	 compared   with  other	  candidates
similarly circumstanced. They are also not deprived of their
right to  practise  any	 profession,  or  to  carry  on	 any
occupation. They are all qualified doctors, they have passed
their M.B.B.S. examination, almost all of them have appeared
for the	 entrance test	held for the November, 1981 semester
and they are all serving and practising as doctors.
     Shri  T.U.	  Mehta,  who	appears	 on  behalf  of	 the
petitioners,  says   that  the	wholesale  non-admission  of
students to  the Postgraduate Course for the three semesters
which commenced	 in July  1980, November, 1980 and July 1981
is an  arbitrary act  which offends against the guarantee of
fairness implicit  in article  14. The	answer of  the State
Government is that the rules which were in operation in July
1980,  governing  admission  to	 the  Post-graduate  Medical
Course, were prejudicial to the interests of the students of
the  Jammu   Medical  College	and  were,   to	 an  extent,
discriminatory. That  is why, no admissions were made to the
July 1980 semester.
347
There is  apparently no	 reason for doubting the veracity of
this explanation though, we do not know why the amendment of
the rules  of admission,  so as	 to bring them in conformity
with the  requirements of  the Constitution, took as long as
18 months.  The red-tape  correspondence between  the Health
Department  Commissioner,  the	Principal  of  the  Srinagar
Medical	 College,   the	 Vice-Chancellor   of  the   Kashmir
University and the Ministry of Health consumed a long time.
     Until the year 1973, there was only one Medical College
in the	State of Jammu & Kashmir, which was at Srinagar. The
Medical College	 at Jammu  was started	in 1973.  The  Jammu
Medical College	 is affiliated to the Jammu University while
the Srinagar  Medical College  is affiliated  to the Kashmir
University.  The   statutes  of	 Jammu	University  did	 not
correspond to  the statutes  of the  Kashmir University	 for
admission  to  the  post-graduate  course,  thereby  causing
discrimination	 in   favour   of   those   fulfilling	 the
requirements under  statutes of	 the Kashmir  University  as
against those  eligible under  the  statutes  of  the  Jammu
University. With  more and  more candidates  from the  Jammu
Medical College becoming eligible for selection to the post-
graduate  medical   course,  the   discriminatory  procedure
prescribed by  the statutes of the Kashmir University became
conspicuous. That  is why  the State  Government had to take
action for  curing the	defects which  were inherent  in the
prevailing procedure  for  selection  to  the  post-graduate
medical course	in the	two medical  colleges.	The  Kashmir
University statute was amended so as to introduce uniformity
in the rules of admission. According to clause 3 of the 1980
Notice of  Admission, it was necessary for the candidates to
have completed	one  year's  Compulsory	 House	Job  in	 the
concerned speciality,  as provided  in the  statutes of	 the
Kashmir University.  Under the	amended provision which came
into force  in 1981,  candidates have to complete one year's
House Job  in a	 recognised  institution  in  the  concerned
subject or  six months'	 House Job  in the concerned subject
and six	 months' House Job in an allied subject. The amended
rule conforms  to the  rule which prevails in other parts of
the country and is in accordance with the recommendations of
the Medical Council of India.
     In so far as the allegation of mala fides is concerned,
no specific facts have been alleged on the basis of which we
can record  a finding  that the	 decision not  to admit	 any
students at all for three consecutive semesters was actuated
by a mala fide intention on the
348
part of	 the State  Government. There is a bald assertion in
the Writ  Petitions that a total ban was placed on admission
to the	three consecutive  semesters in order to favour some
persons. Who  those persons  are we  do not  know. How	they
stood to  gain by  a tota  ban on  admissions to  the  post-
graduate course	 for a	year and  half is not clear. And, we
cannot assume  which dealing  with a question which has such
far reaching  consequences as  the question  of mala  fides,
that the  State Government  had some  particular persons  in
mind, to  favour whom,	every one of the students was denied
the benefit  of post-graduate  education.  How,	 by  denying
admission to  all, favour was shown to a few is difficult to
understand, especially	when those  few	 favourites  are  in
obscurity and remain unidentified.
     Since there  is no	 violation of any of the fundamental
rights of  the petitioners,  nor indeed is the action of the
State authorities arbitrary or mala fide, the petitions must
fail and are dismissed. There will be no order as to costs.
N.V.K.					Petitions dismissed.
349




