

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Joginder Singh And Ors vs State Of Punjab And Anr on 29 August, 1984Equivalent citations: 1985 AIR  382, 1985 SCR  (1) 682
Author: R Pathak
Bench: Pathak, R.S.
           PETITIONER:
JOGINDER SINGH AND ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF PUNJAB AND ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT29/08/1984

BENCH:
PATHAK, R.S.
BENCH:
PATHAK, R.S.
THAKKAR, M.P. (J)

CITATION:
 1985 AIR  382		  1985 SCR  (1) 682
 1985 SCC  (1) 231	  1984 SCALE  (2)685
 CITATOR INFO :
 RF	    1991 SC2023	 (6)


ACT:
     Land Acquisition  Act, 1894-Ss.  28 and  34-Amended  by
Haryana Act  No.8 of 1967 enhancing rate of interest payable
on  compensation-Compensation	fixed  by  Land	 Acquisition
Officer enhanced  by Court-Enhanced  rate of  interest to be
paid  on  amount  of  enhanced	compensation  from  date  of
possession of  land and	 not from date when compensation was
enhanced by Court.



HEADNOTE:
     The  appellants   were  awarded   certain	 amount	  of
compensation by the Land Acquisition Officer which was later
enhanced by  the District Judge and the High Court. On being
pointed out  that ss.  28 and 34 of the Land Acquisition Act
had been  amended by  the Haryana  Act No.  8 of  1967 which
enhanced the  rate of  interest payable	 on  the  amount  of
compensation from  4 to 6 per cent per annum, the High Court
awarded interest  at the rate of 4 per cent per annum on the
amount of  compensation	 awarded  by  the  Land	 Acquisition
Officer and  enhanced by  the District	Judge from  the date
possession was	taken and 6 per cent per annum on the amount
of  compensation  enhanced  by	it  from  the  date  of	 its
judgment. In  this appeal the appellants challenged the rate
of interest as determined by the High Court.
     Allowing the appeal,
^
     HELD: The right to compensation arises when the land is
acquired,  and	 the  judgment	of  the	 High  Court  merely
represents  a  stage  in  the  process	of  quantifying	 the
compensation.	The    right   to   compensation   and	 the
quantification thereof	are two	 distinct concepts. Although
the  process  of  quantification  may  pass  though  several
stages, the  process of	 quantification	 is  merely  one  of
computing the  value of	 the land, on the principles enacted
in the	Land Acquisition  Act. All along, however, the right
to the compensation so quantified refers back to the date of
acquisition. The  additional amount  of compensation awarded
by the	District Judge	or by  the High Court represents the
difference between  the true  value of	the land  on the one
hand and  the actual  amount awarded on the other which fell
short of  the true  value. The owner of the land is entitled
to be  paid the true value of the land on the date of taking
over  of  possession.  The  fact  that	the  true  value  is
determined later  does not mean that the right to the amount
comes into existence at a later
683
date. And  if, as the High Court has held, interest at 6 per
cent per  annum from  the date	possession was	taken in the
case of	 compensation determined  by  the  learned  District
Judge, there  is no  reason why	 the same rate should not be
applied from  the date	possession was	taken in the case of
the enhancement effected by the High Court. [684H;685 A-D]



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPEAL  JURISDICTION: Civil	Appeal No.  2293  of
1978
     From the  Order dated 21.4.77 of the Punjab and Haryana
High Court in Civil Misc. No. 508-C-1/77.
     Ramlal for the Appellants.
     The Order of the Court was delivered by
     PATHAK, J.	 This appeal  by special  leave is  directed
against the  order dated April 21, 1977 of the High Court of
Punjab and  Haryana determining	 the interest payable on the
compensation awarded  to the  appellants for the acquisition
of their land by the State Government.
     A notification  under Section 4 of the land Acquisition
Act was made on August 31, 1961 in respect of land belonging
to the	appellants and in the proceedings which followed the
land Acquisition  officer determined  a sum of Rs. 27,992.84
as compensation payable therefor. Possession of the land was
taken thereafter.  On reference	 made at the instance of the
appellants, the	 learned District Judge held by his judgment
dated November 30, 1963 that the appellants were entitled to
a further sum of Rs. 11,307.10 as compensation. Dissatisfied
with that  determination, the appellants proceeded in appeal
to the	High Court, and on March 8, 1977 the High Court held
that the appellants were entitled to a further amount of Rs.
17,919.30 as compensation. The High Court also held that the
appellants were	 entitled to  interest at  the rate of 4 per
cent per  annum	 on  the  enhanced  amount  of	compensation
awarded by  it, the interest to run from the date possession
of the	land was  taken. The  appellants then applied to the
High Court  for a  review of  its order	 in so far as it had
determined the	rate of interest. The appellants pointed out
that s.	 28 and	 s. 34 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 had
been amended by the Haryana Act No. 8 of 1967 in consequence
of which the rate of interest payable on the compensa-
684
tion was  awarded for  acquisition of land had been enhanced
from 4	per cent  to 6	per cent  per annum  from  the	date
possession was	taken to  the date of payment. The claim was
resisted by  the State, which contended that the Haryana Act
No. 8  of 1967	had been brought into force with effect from
July 1,	 1967  and  proceedings	 for  the  determination  of
compensation initiated	before the  enforcement of  that Act
were liable  to be governed by the original rate of interest
at 4  per cent per annum, and no advantage could be taken of
the higher  rate enacted later. By its order dated April 21,
1977 the  High Court  ruled in	favour of the appellants and
held that the higher rate of interest should be available to
the appellants even though the proceedings for determination
of compensation were already pending before the amending Act
was brought  into force.  A curious  inconsistency, however,
entered thereafter in the judgment of the High Court. On the
amount determined  as compensation  by the  Land Acquisition
Officer and  the learned  District Judge the High Court held
that the higher rate of interest at 6 per cent per annum was
attracted, and	interest at  that rate	ruled from  the date
possession was	taken to  the date  of payment.	 But on	 the
amount of  Rs. 17,919.30  representing the enhancement by it
the High Court applied the rate of 4 per cent per annum from
the date  possession was taken and 6 per cent per annum from
the date  of its  judgment awarding  that amount.  The	High
Court seems  to have proceeded on the view that the right to
this amount  of Rs.  17,919.30 as  compensation arose to the
appellants only from date of its judgment.
     We are  of opinion that the High Court has erred. It is
apparent from  the impugned  order of the High Court that it
has found the appellants entitled to interest at the rate of
4 per  cent per	 annum on  the sum of Rs. 17,919.30 from the
date possession	 was taken.  In so  far that  the High Court
recognises the	appellants' claim to interest from that date
the High  Court is  right, because the right to compensation
arises when  the land  is acquired,  and the judgment of the
High Court  merely represents  a stage	in  the	 process  of
quantifying the	 compensation. The right to compensation and
the quantification  thereof are	 two distinct  concepts. The
right to  compensation arises  when the	 land vests  in	 the
State while  its quantification may be concluded much later.
Although the  process of  quantification  may  pass  through
several stages,	 from the  Land Acquisition  Officer to	 the
District Judge and thereafter to the High
685
Court, the  process  of	 quantification	 is  merely  one  of
computing the  value of	 the land, on the principles enacted
in the	Land Acquisition  Act. All along, however, the right
to the compensation so quantified refers back to the date of
acquisition. The  additional amount  of compensation awarded
by the	District Judge	or by  the High Court represents the
difference between  the true  value of	the land  on the one
hand and  the actual  amount awarded on the other which fell
short of  the true  value. The owner of the land is entitled
to be  paid the true value of the land on the date of taking
over of	 possession.  Since,  however,	the  true  value  is
usually determined  only after	it  is	computed  through  a
multi-tiered process  passing through  different levels of a
hierarchical judicial structure by the very nature of things
it take	 sometime before  the  true  value  can	 be  finally
determined. The	 fact that  it is  determined later does not
mean that  the right to the amount comes into existence at a
later date.  And if, as the High Court has held, interest at
6 per  cent per	 annum rules  from the	date procession	 was
taken in  the case of compensation determined by the learned
District Judge,	 there is no reason why the same rate should
not be	applied from  the date	possession was	taken in the
case of the enhancement effected by the High Court.
     We hold that the appellants are entitled to interest at
6 per  cent per annum on the amount of Rs. 17,919.30 for the
entire period from the date possession of the land was taken
to the date of payment.
     The appeal	 is allowed,  and the  order dated April 21,
1977 passed  by the  High Court is modified accordingly. The
respondents will pay the costs of the appellants.
H.S.K.	  Appeal allowed
686

