

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Mohammad Idris And Anr vs Rustam Jahangir Babuji And Others on 27 August, 1984Equivalent citations: 1984 AIR 1826, 1985 SCR  (1) 598
Author: O C Reddy
Bench: Reddy, O. Chinnappa (J)
           PETITIONER:
MOHAMMAD IDRIS AND ANR.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
RUSTAM JAHANGIR BABUJI AND OTHERS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT27/08/1984

BENCH:
REDDY, O. CHINNAPPA (J)
BENCH:
REDDY, O. CHINNAPPA (J)
MISRA RANGNATH

CITATION:
 1984 AIR 1826		  1985 SCR  (1) 598
 1984 SCC  (4) 216	  1984 SCALE  (2)213


ACT:
     Contempt of Courts Act 1971, Section 19~1).
     High Court-Single Judge-ordering committal for contempt
of court  Appealed before  Division  Bench-Dismissed-Whether
statutory right of appeal lies to supreme Court.



HEADNOTE:
     The two  petitioners in the Special Leave Petition were
committed to  the civil	 jail for  a period  of one month by
Single Judge  of the High Court under the Contempt of Courts
Act 1971,  as they  had acted  in breach  of an	 undertaking
given by  them in  a suit  pending in  the High	 Court.	 The
appeal preferred  by the  petitioners under Section 19(1) of
the Act to a Division	  Bench was dismissed.
     In the  Special Leave  Petition  it  was  contended  on
behalf of  the petitioners  that :  though the	petition had
been filed  under Article  136 the petitioners have, in law,
an appeal  as of  right under  Section 19(1),  and  (2)	 the
Single Judge  was not  justified  in  giving  directions  in
addition to punishing the petitioners for contempt of court.
     Dismissing the Special Leave Petition,
^
     HELD:1. If the order of committal for contempt of court
is made	 by a  Single Judge  of the High Court, there is one
statutory right	 of appeal  to a  Division Bench of not less
than two  Judges. If  the order	 of committal of contempt of
court is  made by a Bench, an appeal lies as of right to the
Supreme Court. Where an appeal is filed against the order of
the Single Judge to a Division Bench, the statutory right of
appeal gets  exhausted and  there is  no  further  right  of
appeal to the Supreme Court.[600B.C]
     2. As there was a clear breach of the undertaking given
by the	petitioners, the  Single Judge	was quite  right  in
giving appropriate directions to close the breach. [600E]



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Special  Leave  Petition
(Civil) No. 9395 of 1984.
     From the Judgment and order dated the 10th August, 1984
of the Bombay High Court in Appeal No. 721 of 1984.
     R. N. Keshwani for the Petitioners.
599
     R. Karenjawala for the Respondent.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     CHINNAPPA	REDDY,	 J.  On	  an  allegation   that	 the
petitioners had	 acted in  breach of an undertaking given by
them in Suit No. 2308 of 1983 in the High Court of Bombay, a
notice was  issued to them to show cause why they should not
be committed  for contempt  of court. Cause was sought to be
shown. A learned Single Judge of the High Court recorded the
following finding:
	  "In my judgment the action of defendants Nos 4 and
     6 clearly	shows utter  contempt for  the orders of the
     court and	under  taking  given  by  them.	 I  have  no
     hesitation	 in   holding  that  these  defendants	have
     committed gross  contempt of  Court...in  my  judgment,
     there is no circumstance whatsoever to take any lenient
     view of  the gross	 contempt committed  by defendants 4
     and 6  and both of them are liable to be punished under
     the provisions of Contempt of Courts Act."
     On those  findings the  learned Single  Judge committed
each of the two petitioners to the civil jail for the period
of one month. Against the order of the learned Single Judge,
the petitioners preferred an appeal to the Division Bench of
the High  Court under s 19(1) of the Contempt of Courts Act,
1971. The appeal was dismissed by the Division Bench and the
present Special	 Leave Petition	 has been  filed against the
judgment of  the Division  Bench. Shri	Ramesh	N.  Keswani.
learned counsel	 for the petitioners submits that though the
Petition for  Special Leave  to Appeal	has been filed under
Article 136  of the  Constitution, the	petitioners have, in
law, an appeal as of right under s. 19(1) of the Contempt of
Courts Act.  The submission  has only  to be  stated  to  be
rejected as  totally lacking  in substance. Section 19(1) of
the Contempt of Courts Act is as follows:
	  "An appeal shall lie as of right from any order or
     decision of  High Court in exercise of its jurisdiction
     to punish for contempt-
     (a)   where the  order or	decision is that of a single
	  Judge, to  a Bench  of not less than two Judges of
	  the Court;
     (b)  where the order or decision is that of a Bench, to
	  the
600
	  Supreme Court;
     Provided that  where the  order or	 decision is that of
     the Court	of the	Judicial Commissioner  in any  Union
     Territory, such appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court."
     If the order of committal for contempt or Court is made
by a  Single Judge of the High Court, there is one statutory
right of  appeal to  a Division	 Bench of  not less than two
Judges of  the Court  If the order of committal for contempt
of court  is made  by a Bench, an appeal lies as of right to
the Supreme  Court. Where  an appeal  is filed	against	 the
order of  the learned  Single Judge to a Division Bench, the
statutory right	 or appeal  gets exhausted  and there  is no
further right  of appeal  to the Supreme Court Shri Keshwani
cited to  us  Purushottam  Das	Goel  v.  Hon.	Justice	 B.S
Dhillon.(1) The decision is entirely irrelevant.
     On merits,	 the  learned  counsel	submitted  that	 the
undertaking  given  was	 not  in  respect  of  the  property
concerned and  that in any case the learned Single Judge was
not justified  in giving  certain directions  in addition to
punishing the  petitioners for contempt of court. We find no
substance in  the submissions  made by	the learned counsel.
There was  a clear  breach of  the undertaking	given by the
petitioners and	 we are of the opinion that the Single Judge
was quite  right in  giving appropriate	 directions to close
the  breach.  The  Special  Leave  Petition  is,  therefore,
dismissed
N.V.K.	   Petition dismissed.
601
