

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Raghunath Thakur vs State Of Bihar & Ors on 8 November, 1988Equivalent citations: 1989 AIR  620, 1988 SCR  Supl. (3) 867
Author: S Mukharji
Bench: Mukharji, Sabyasachi (J)
           PETITIONER:
RAGHUNATH THAKUR

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF BIHAR & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT08/11/1988

BENCH:
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)
BENCH:
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)
RANGNATHAN, S.

CITATION:
 1989 AIR  620		  1988 SCR  Supl. (3) 867
 1989 SCC  (1) 229	  JT 1988 (4)	728
 1988 SCALE  (2)1326


ACT:
    Administrative  Law: Black listing--Right to be  heard--
Making representation against the order--Necessity for.



HEADNOTE:
     The  appellant  has bid in an auction of  Beni  Country
Liquor Shop in the District of Samastipur and was given	 the
shop  being the highest bidder but he failed to deposit	 the
bid money in time.
     The Collector, Samastipur by an order cancelled the bid
and black listed the appellant. He then moved the High Court
against	 the order of the Collector. The High  Court  upheld
the order of the Collector.
     The appellant appealed to this Court by special leave.
     Disposing of the appeal, the Court,
     HELD: 1. It is an implied principle of the rule of	 law
that  any order having civil consequences should  be  passed
only  after  following the principles  of  natural  justice.
Black-listing any person in respect of business ventures has
civil  consequences  for the future business of	 the  person
concerned in any event. [868H; 869A]
     2.	 Even  if  the rules do not express  so,  it  is  an
elementary   principle	of  natural  justice  that   parties
affected  by any order should have right of being heard	 and
making representations against the order. [869B]
     In	 the  instant  case,  that  portion  of	 the   order
directing that the appellant be placed in the black-list  in
respect	 of  future  contracts under the  Collector  is	 set
aside.	So  far	 as  the cancellation  of  the	bid  of	 the
appellant is concerned, that is not affected. [869B-C]



JUDGMENT:
    CIVIL  APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 4031  of
1988.
From the Judgment and Order dated 14.4.1988 of the Patna High
						   PG NO 867
						   PG NO 868
  Court in C.W.J.C. No. 1923 of 1988.
R.K. Jain, R.P.Singh and Y.D.Chandrachud for the Appellant.
U.S. Prasad for the Respondents.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     SABYASACHI MUKHARJI, J. Special leave granted.
     The  order dated 25th March, 1988 of the  Collector  is
under challenge in this appeal. The same reads as follows:
     "Shri Raghu Nath Thakur S/o Late Gorakh Thakur, Village
Repura,	 P.S.  Puksha,	District  Samastipur  had  bid	 for
Rs.11,900 (Rupees eleven thousands only) per month Dak in an
auction	 of Beni Country liquor shop held on 27.3.88 and  he
as  given the shop of Beni Country liquor but after  signing
in Bandobasti Register he did not deposit dak amount.
     The name of Shri Raghu Nath Thakur S/o Late Gorakh Nath
Village	 Repura, P.S. Pusa, Distt. Samastipur  is  therefore
placed in the black list for future under the orders  passed
by the Collector, Samastipur."
     This  order  was passed pursuant to the  order  of	 the
Collector.  The	 letter dated 25th March,  1988,  states  as
follows:
     "The  Collector  of the district after perusal  of	 the
said  office note passed order on 25.3.88 which is  produced
in verbatim below:
     Ist bidder chunki defaulter hai atah security prapt kar
len tatha bhavishya ke liae Black list karen. "
     Indisputably, no notice had been given to the appellant
of  the	 proposal  of black-listing the	 appellant.  It	 was
contended  on behalf of the State Government that there	 was
no requirement in the rule of giving any prior notice before
black-listing  any person. In so far as the contention	that
there is no requirement specifically of giving any notice is
concerned,  the	 respondent is right. But it is	 an  implied
principle  of  the rule of law that any order  having  civil
consequence  should  be	 passed	 only  after  following	 the
						   PG NO 869
principles  of natural justice. It has to be  realised	that
black-listing any person in respect of business ventures has
civil  consequence  for the future business  of	 the  person
concerned in any event. Even if the rules do not express so,
it  is	an  elementary principle  of  natural  justice	that
parties	 affected  by any order should have right  of  being
heard and making representations against the order. In	that
view of the matter, the last portion of the order in so	 far
as  it directs black-listing of the appellant in respect  of
future	contracts,  cannot  be	sustained  in  law.  In	 the
premises,  that	 portion  of the order	directing  that	 the
appellant  be placed in the black-list in respect of  future
contracts  under the Collector is set aside. So far  as	 the
cancellation of the bid of the appellant is concerned,	that
is  not affected. This order will, however, not prevent	 the
State Government or the appropriate authorities from  taking
any  future  steps  for blacklisting the  appellant  if	 the
Government  is so entitled to do so in accordance with	law,
i.e.  giving the appellant due notice and an opportunity  of
making	representation.	 After hearing	the  appellant,	 the
State  Government  will be at liberty to pass any  order  in
accordance  with  law indicating the reasons  therefor.	 We,
however, make it quite clear that we are not expressing	 any
opinion	 on the correctness or otherwise of the	 allegations
made against the appellant. The appeal is thus disposed of.
S . K . A .			       Appeal disposed of.




