

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Maharashtra State Cooperative ... vs Shripati Pandurang Khade & Ors. ... on 11 October, 1988Equivalent citations: 1989 AIR  485, 1988 SCR  Supl. (3) 472
Author: M Dutt
Bench: Dutt, M.M. (J)
           PETITIONER:
MAHARASHTRA STATE COOPERATIVE COTTONGROWERS MARKETING FEDERA

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
SHRIPATI PANDURANG KHADE & ORS. ETC.

DATE OF JUDGMENT11/10/1988

BENCH:
DUTT, M.M. (J)
BENCH:
DUTT, M.M. (J)
NATRAJAN, S. (J)

CITATION:
 1989 AIR  485		  1988 SCR  Supl. (3) 472
 1989 SCC  Supl.  (1) 226 1988 SCALE  (2)1005


ACT:
    Maharashtra	 Recognition of Trade Unions and  Prevention
of  Unfair Labour Practices Act 1971--Section 5(d)--Duty  of
Industrial  Court  to decide complaints relating  to  unfair
labour practices except those Falling in item I of  Schedule
IV of the Act.
%
    Maharashtra	 Recognition of Trade Unions and  Prevention
of Unfair Labour Practices Act 1971--Unfair Labour Practice-
-What is--An industrial award declared employees  permanent-
-Appellant treated them as seasonal or temporary  employees.
Held--Amounts to unfair labour practice.



HEADNOTE:
    Industrial	Court--Duty of--Must give an opportunity  to
applicants to explain the delay if the complaints are barred
by limitation.
    The	 respondents  were  earlier  the  employees  of	  an
organisation   called  the  Maharashtra	 State	 Cooperative
Marketing Federation Limited (Marketing Federation). Later a
new  organisation namely the Maharashtra  State	 Cooperative
Cotton	Growers	 Marketing Federation  Ltd.,  the  appellant
herein,	 was  formed  and  some of  the	 activities  of	 the
Marketing  Federation were assigned to it. By  letter  dated
l0th  August,  1984, the Government directed  the  Marketing
Federation  that the  Services of the seasonal staff  should
be  terminated and those of the regular staff be  placed  at
the  disposal  of  the new organisation.  As  the  Marketing
Federation  and the appellant failed and neglected  to	give
them the permanent status, the respondents made a  complaint
before	the  Industrial Court complaining of  unfair  labour
practices  on the part of the Marketing Federation  as	also
the  appellant herein as contained in  Items 6 and 9 of	 the
Schedule  IV of the Act. The workers stated that  even	when
there  was  an	award  in their	 favour	 by  the  Industrial
Tribunal  declaring  them as permanent	employees,  yet	 the
Marketing Federation and the appellant did not give them the
status of permanent employees. The Industrial Court took the
view (i) that the complaints made by the respondents did not
come under items nos. 6 and 9 but they came under item No. I
and  as such he could not decide the complaints in  view  of
						  PG NO 472
						  PG NO 473
section	 5(d)  of  the Act, (ii) that there  was  no  unfair
labour	practice on the part of the Marketing Federation  or
the appellant, and (iii) that the complaints were barred  by
limitation. The Industrial Court dismissed the complaints of
the  respondents.  Feeling aggrieved the  respondents  filed
writ  petitions	 before	 the High Court and  the  same	were
allowed. Hence these appeals by special leave. The appellant
contended  that	 the award of the Industrial Court  was	 not
binding on them. Dismissing the appeals, this Court,
    HELD:  In  view of the Award, it must be held  that	 the
respondents  were the permanent employees of  the  Marketing
Federation, and that after the constitution of the appellant
and   the  transfer  ot-the  employees	of   the   Marketing
Federation  to	the appellant, the appellant  was  bound  to
accept	the  respondents as permanent employees and  not  to
treat  them  as seasonal employees or  temporary  employees.
This  act  on the part of the appellant	 amounts  to  unfair
labour practice. [476E-F]
    There  is  no  justification  for  the  finding  of	 the
Industrial Court that the complaints made by the respondents
do not come within the purview of Items Nos. 6 and 9 of	 the
Schedule  IV of the Maharashtra Recognition of Trade  Unions
and  Prevention	 of Unfair Labour Practices  Act,  1971.  No
reason	has  been  given by the	 Industrial  Court  why	 the
complaints  come  within Item No. I of Schedule IV  and,  as
such, can be decided only by the labour Court and not by the
Industrial Tribunal. The complaints made by the	 respondents
are   clear  and  specific  and	 there	was  no	 scope	 for
categorising them as complaints under Item No. I of Schedule
IV. [476G-H;477]
    It	has been assumed 1 the Industrial Tribunal that	 the
respondents  came to now That they were being  appointed  as
seasonal   employees  on  the  respective  dates  of   their
appointment  letters.  There  is, however,  no	material  on
record	to show on what dates the appointment  letters	were
served	on  the	 respondents.  In  the	circumstances,	 the
Industrial  Court was not at  all Justified in holding	than
the  complaints	 filed	by the respondents  were  barred  by
limitation. Even assuming that the complaints were barred by
limitation, as held by the Industrial Court, the  Industrial
Court  should  have given an opportunity to the	 respondents
for explaining the delay. No such opportunity has been given
to  the	 respondents. Accordingly, this Court is  unable  to
subscribe  to  the  view of the Industrial  Court  that	 the
complaints   filed  by	the  respondents  were	 barred	  by
limitation. [477B-D]



JUDGMENT:
    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No  3719-3721
of l988.
						  PG NO 474
    From  the  Judgment and Order dated 9/10.3.1987  of	 the
Bombay High Court in W.P. Nos. 620, 622 and 621 of 1986.
    G.	Ramaswamy,  Additional Solicitor  General  and	A.M.
Khanwilkar for the Appellant.
    Dr.	 R.S. Kulkarni, Jitender Sharma, D.M. Nargolkar	 and
A.S. Bhasme for the Respondents.
    The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
    DUTT,  J. Special is granted. Heard learned Counsel	 for
the parties.
    These   appeals   preferred	 by   the   appellant,	 the
Maharashtra  State  Cooperative	 Cotton	 Growers   Marketing
Federation  Ltd., are directed against the judgment  of	 the
Bombay	High Court whereby the High Court allowed  the	writ
petitions  of the respondents and quashed the order  of	 the
Industrial  Court  Maharashtra (Kolhapur  Bench),  Kolhapur,
dismissing the complaints filed by the respondents.
    The Government of Maharashtra appointed the	 Maharashtra
State Cooperative Marketing Federation, hereinafter referred
to as	     "the Marketing Federation", the Chief Agent  in
the  Cotton  Monopoly	 Scheme	 under	the  provision	of
section 42 of tile Maharashtra Raw	Cotton	(Procurement
Process	 of  Marketing)	 Act, 1971. The	 activities	 of  the
Marketing   Federation	extended  to  various	agricultural
produce	  including  foodgrains.  In  February,	  1984	 the
Government  carved out the operation of the levy  of  cotton
from  the other activities of the Marketing  Federation	 and
assigned  them to another society, namely.  the	 Maharashtra
State Cooperative Cotton Growers Marketing Federation  Ltd.,
the  appellant	in  all these appeals. By  its	order  dated
August	10,  1984,  the Government  directed  the  Marketing
Federation to take the following actions:
    "(i)  In respect of the Staff working under	 the  Cotton
Monopoly  Scheme  at present, the Services of  the  seasonal
staff  working, if any, should be terminated with  immediate
effect and in any case not later than 15th August, 1984.
    (ii)  So  far as the regular staff is concerned,  it  is
proposed  that	the  services of the staff  working  in	 the
Cotton	Department  of the Federation at Bombay and  in	 the
Mofussil  areas would be placed at the disposal of  the	 new
						  PG NO 475
Organisation  on  "as  is where is basis" as  on  1st  July,
1984."
    In	a  subsequent  letter dated September  8,  1984	 the
Marketing Federation was directed to effect the transfer  of
the  chief  agency  from the  Marketing	 Federation  to	 the
appellant,  inter  alia by transferring all the	 assets	 and
liabilities  under the scheme account and the cash and	Bank
balance	 at Bombay and Mofussil under the scheme account  as
well as under the non-scheme account to the appellant etc.
    The	  respondents  claimed	that  they  were   permanent
employees  of  the Marketing Federation and in view  of	 the
directions  contained  in the said letter dated	 August	 10,
1984 of the Government, the appellant should have  appointed
them on a permanent basis and not as seasonal employees. The
case  of  the  respondents was that they  had  been  in	 the
employment of the Marketing Federation since 1972 on monthly
salaries  with annual increments. Even though there  was  an
Award  in their favour by the Industrial Tribunal  declaring
them  as permanent employees, yet the  Marketing  Federation
and  the  appellant failed and neglected to  give  them	 the
permanent  status. Accordingly, they made complaints  before
the Industrial Court complaining of unfair labour  practices
on the part of the Marketing Federation as also on the	part
of  the	 appellant  as contained in Items Nos. 6  and  9  of
Schedule  IV to the Maharashtra Recognition of Trade  Unions
and Prevention of Unfair Labour Practices Act, 1971 items  6
and 9 are as follows:
    "Items  6.	To employ employee as "badlis",	 casuals  or
temporaries and to continue them as such for years, with the
object	of  depriving them of the status and  privileges  of
permanent employees.
    Item  9.  Failure  to  implement  award,  settlement  or
agreement.
    In this connection, we may refer to section 5(d) of	 the
said  Act  which provides that it shall be the duty  of	 the
Industrial  Court  to decide complaints relating  to  unfair
labour	practices except unfair labour practices falling  in
Item I of Schedule IV.
    The	 Industrial Court took the view that the  complaints
made  by the respondents did not come under Item Nos. 6	 and
9, but they came under Item No. I and, as such, it could not
decide	the complaints in view of section 5(d). Further,  it
was  held by the Industrial Court that there was  no  unfair
						  PG NO 476
labour	practice on the part of the Marketing  Fedration  or
the  appellant and that, in any event, the  complaints	were
barred	by limitation as the same were filed beyond 90	days
from the date of the knowledge of the respondents that	they
were appointed by the appellant as seasonal employees.	Upon
the  said  findings,  the  Industrial  Court  dismissed	 the
complaints of the respondents. Being  aggrieved by the order
of   the  Industrial  Court,  the  respondents	filed	writ
petitions before the High Court and, as stated already,	 the
High Court allowed the writ petitions and quashed the  order
of the Industrial  Court. Hence these appeals.
    It has been already noticed that under the Award of	 the
Industrial  Tribunal,  the  respondents	 were  declared	 the
permanent   employees  of  the	Marketing  Federation.	 The
appellant has prepared a seniority list for the year 1985-86
which  shows that most of the respondents have been  in	 the
employment of the Marketing Federation since 1972. The	said
seniority  list is Annexure 'D' to the writ petitions  filed
by  the respondents in the High Court. The annual  increment
list,  also  D	prepared by the appellant,  shows  that	 the
respondents  have  been in the service of the  appellant  on
monthly	 salaries and they were given annual  increments  on
November  1,  1985.  In	 spite	of  the	 above	facts,	 the
respondents  have been shown in the seniority list and	also
in the annual increment list as temporary employees. In	 our
opinion,  there	 cannot	 he any doubt that  there  has	been
unfair	labour	practice  on  the   part  of  the  Marketing
Federation  as also on the appellant by continuing  them  as
temporary employees. We are unable to accept the  contention
of  the	 appellant  that the Award is  not  binding  on	 the
appellant.  In view of the Award, it must be held  that	 the
respondents  were the permanent employees of  the  Marketing
Federation, and that after the constitution of the appellant
and   the  transfer  of	 the  employees	 of  the   Marketing
Federation  to	the appellant, the appellant  was  bound  to
accept	the  respondents as permanent employees and  not  to
treat  them  as seasonal employees or  temporary  employees.
This  act  on the part of the appellant	 amounts  to  unfair
labour practice.
    We do not find any justification for the finding of	 the
Industrial Court that the complaints made by the respondents
do  not	 come within the purview of Items Nos. 6  and  9  of
Schedule  IV of the Maharashtra Recognition of Trade  Unions
and  Prevention	 of Unfair Labour Practices  Act,  1971.  No
reason	has  been  given by the	 Industrial  Court  why	 the
complaints  come  within Item No. 1 of Schedule IV  and.  as
such, can be decided only by the Labour Court and not by the
Industrial Tribunal. The complaints made by the	 respondents
are   clear  and  specific  and	 there	was  no	 scope	 for
						  PG NO 477
categorising them as complaints under Item No. 1 of Schedule
IV.
    With   regard  to  the  question  of   limitation,	 the
Industrial  Tribunal seems to think that as the	 appointment
letters	 bear  some dates in October, 1984,  the  period  of
limitation will be computed from the respective dates of the
appointment  letters. It has been assumed by the  Industrial
Tribunal  that the respondents come to know that  they	were
being  appointed  as seasonal employees	 on  the  respective
dates  of their appointment letters. There is,	however,  no
material  on  record to show on what dates  the	 appointment
letters	 were  served on the respondents.  In  other  words,
there  is nothing to show when the respondents received	 the
appointment  letters. In the circumstances,  the  Industrial
Court  was  not	 at  all  justified  in	 holding  that	 the
complaints   filed  by	the  respondents  were	 barred	  by
limitation. Even assuming that the complaints were barred by
limitation, as held by the Industrial Court, the  Industrial
Court  should have given an opportunity to  the	 respondents
for explaining the delay. No such opportunity has been given
to the respondents. Accordingly, we are unable to  subscribe
to  the	 view of the Industrial Court  that  the  complaints
filed by the respondents were barred by limitation.
    Before  parting with these appeals, we may dispose of  a
short  contention of the appellant. The learned Counsel	 for
the appellant has placed much reliance upon a letter of	 the
Government dated November 9, 1984 giving some directions  to
the appellant as contained in paragraphs 1 and 2 of the said
letter. Paragraphs 1 and 2 are as follows:
    1. All staff recruited after 1st July 1972	specifically
for  the  cotton scheme with prior  approval  of  Government
wherever  necessary or where the  Government  representative
was   associated  with	the  selection/appointment  of	 the
candidates  should  be	immediately  placed  on	  deputation
without	 payment  of  Deputation  Allowance  to	 the  Cotton
Growers' Marketing Federation Their salaries and  allowances
will  be payable from the scheme as part of  the  commission
payable	 to the Cotton Growers Federation till 1st  January,
1985.
    2.	The  Cotton  Growers Federation	 Ltd.  will  finally
absorb	the above categories of staff after scrutiny  as  on
1st  January,1985. Those out of the above staff who are	 not
						  PG NO 478
acceptable  to	the new Federation for some  reason  or	 the
other,	and so have to be retrenched, will be retrenched  by
the Maharashtra State Cooperative Marketing Federation	Ltd.
and  the  cost	thereof would be debited  to  cotton  scheme
account"
    On the basis of the directions in paragraph 2  extracted
above,	it is submitted on behalf of the appellant that	 the
appellant  is  at  liberty  not	 to  absorb  or	 accept	 the
respondents in the appellant's concern. This contention,  in
our opinion, is without any substance whatsoever. There is a
specific  direction that the appellant shall finally  absorb
the  staff of the Marketing Fedration after scrutiny  as  on
January	 1, 1985. The appellant cannot refuse to  absorb  or
accept	a  permanent employee of  the  Marketing  Federation
without any reason whatsoever. So far as the respondents are
concerned,  we	do  not find any reason	 why  the  appellant
should not accept them as its permanent employees. The	High
Court  has rightly directed the appellant and the  Marketing
Federation  to process the cases of the respondents  on	 the
basis  that they have put in more than 240 days	 of  service
and  grant them all the benefits under the  circular  letter
dated January 18, 1985.
    For	 the  reasons aforesaid, the judgment  of  the	High
Court is affirmed and the appeals are dismissed with one set
of costs quantified at Rs.5,000.
H.S.K.					  Appeals dismissed.




