

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Collector Of Central Excise, ... vs Kiran Spinning Mills, Kolshet ... on 15 February, 1988Equivalent citations: 1988 AIR  871, 1988 SCR  (2)1006
Author: S Mukharji
Bench: Mukharji, Sabyasachi (J)
           PETITIONER:
COLLECTOR OF CENTRAL EXCISE, BOMBAY-II

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
KIRAN SPINNING MILLS, KOLSHET ROAD, THANE

DATE OF JUDGMENT15/02/1988

BENCH:
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)
BENCH:
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)
RANGNATHAN, S.

CITATION:
 1988 AIR  871		  1988 SCR  (2)1006
 1988 SCC  (2) 348	  JT 1988 (1)	369
 1988 SCALE  (1)356


ACT:
     Central  Excise  and  Salt	 Act  1944:  Section  35L  &
Ministry of  Finance Notification  dated December  22, 1972-
'Tow' and  'Staple fibre'-Distinction between-Running length
fibre (tow)  cut into  short length  fibre  (staple  fibre)-
Substance  obtained-Polyester	staple	fibre-Excise   duty-
Liability   for-Taxable	   event   under   excise   law	  is
'manufacture'.
     Word  &  Phrases:	'Tow'-'Staple  fibre'-'Manufacture'-
Meaning of.



HEADNOTE:
%
     The  Central  Excise  Officers  during  the  course  of
investigations made  against M/s Swastik Investment Company,
Bombay found  that some	 of the consignments of the material
described  in  documents  as  'crimpled	 uncut	waste'	were
cleared from  M/s Swadeshi Polytex Limited, Ghaziabad during
the period  from  January,  1974  to  December,	 1977,	were
purchased by  the respondents  and utilised  by them  in the
manufacture of 'polyester staple fibre'.
     The Collector  held that  the  'crimpled  uncut  waste'
purchased by  the respondents  was in  fact 'polyester fibre
tow' and  that the respondents had carried on manufacture of
'polyester staple  fibre' from tow and, as such, exigible to
duty.
     Aggrieved by  the	Collector's  Order  the	 respondents
filed an  appeal before	 the Central  Board  of	 Excise	 and
Customs. This  appeal was  transferred to the Customs Excise
and Gold  Control Appellate Tribunal in pursuance of s. 35-P
of the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944.
     The Tribunal  on an examination of the material and the
contentions came to the conclusion that what the respondents
had purchased  was already  man-made-fibre  but	 in  running
length, and that what they did in relation to it, was to cut
it  into   staple  length  after  some	manual	sorting	 and
straightening and held that such cutting involved no
1007
manufacture and hence no duty liability could be imposed.
     In the  Appeal by	the revenue  to this  Court  on	 the
question: whether  there was  exigibility to taxation on the
item manufactured by the respondent.
     Dismissing the Appeal.
^
     HELD: 1.  There is	 a  distinction	 between  'tow'	 and
'staple fibre'.	 'Tow'	'is  fibre  in	running	 length	 and
'staple fibre' is obtained by cutting it into required short
length. [1009B]
     2.	 The   taxable	event	under  the   Excise  Law  is
'manufacture'. 'Manufacture' means to bring into existence a
new substance  and does	 not mean  merely  to  produce	some
change in a substance. [1009D]
     3.	 Etymologically	  the  word  'manufacture'  properly
construed would	 doubtless  cover  transformation,  but	 the
question is  whether the  transformation in the instant case
brings about  fundamental change, a new substance is brought
into  existence,   or  a   new	different   article   having
distinctive name, character or use results from a particular
process or a particular activity. [1009D-E]
     In the  instant case,  it is not disputed that what the
respondents did,  was to  cut the running length fibre (tow)
into short  length  fibre  (staple  fibre).  It	 indubitably
brought a  change in  the substance  but did  not bring into
existence a  new substance.  The character  and use  of	 the
substance (man-made  fibre) remained the same. By the change
in the	length of  the fibre,  the substance  acquired a new
name. But  since the  tariff  entry  recognised	 the  single
description 'man-made  fibre' with  no further	sub-division
based on  length of  fibre and	even  without  any  distinct
enumeration of	the various  forms of  fibre by cutting long
fibres into  short ones,  the respondents did not bring into
existence any  new product  so as  to attract any levy under
the same  tariff entry.	 Even by  cutting,  the	 respondents
obtained man-made  fibre. Such	cutting, therefore, involved
no manufacture	and, hence, no duty liability can be imposed
upon them. [1009E-H]
     Union of India v. Delhi Cloth & General Mills, [1963] 1
Suppl. SCR  586; Empire Industries Ltd. & Ors. etc. v. Union
of India  & Ors.  etc., [1985] Suppl. 1 SCR page 292 and M/s
Ujagar Prints  v. Union	 of India,  [1986] Suppl.  SCC	652,
referred to.
1008



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 2891 of
1984.
     From the  Judgment	 and  Order  dated  28.2.84  of	 the
Customs Excise	and Gold  Control  Appellate  Tribunal,	 New
Delhi in Order No. 118/84-D.
     A.K. Ganguli,  P. Parmeswaran  and	 K.  Swamy  for	 the
Appellant.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     SABYASACHI MUKHARJI,J. This is a statutory appeal under
Section 35-L(b)	 of the	 Central Excise	 & Salt	 Act,  1944,
hereinafter  called  the  'Act',  against  the	Order  dated
February 22,  1944 passed  by the  Customs,  Excise  &	Gold
(Control) Appellate Tribunal, hereinafter called the 'CEGAT'
     In this  appeal we	 are  concerned	 with  the  question
whether there  was  exigibility	 to  taxation  on  the	item
concerned under	 the Act.  It appears that during the course
of investigations  made against	 Swastik Investment Company,
Bombay, the  Central Excise  Officers found that some of the
consignments of	 the material  described in the documents as
'crimpled uncut	 waste'	 were  cleared	from  M/s.  Swadeshi
Polytex Ltd.,  Ghaziabad, during  the period  from Jan'74 to
Dec'77 and  were purchased  by the  respondents	 herein	 and
utilised in  the manufacture  of polyester staple fibre. The
Collector held	that the  so-called 'crimpled  uncut  waste'
purchased by  the respondents  was, in fact, polyester fibre
tow  and  the  staple  fibre  which  were  commercially	 two
distinct  products   and  the  respondents  had	 carried  on
manufacture of polyester staple fibre from tow and, as such,
exigible to duty. The respondents filed an appeal before the
Central Board  of Excise  & Customs  against the Collector's
Order. The  appeal was	thereafter transferred	to CEGAT  in
pursuance of Section 35-P of the Act.
     It appears	 that there is distinction between a tow and
staple fibre.  The Ministry of Finance (Deptt. of Revenue)'s
circular indicates as follows:
	  "Tow is  a collection	 of many parallel continuous
filaments without  twist which	are grouped together in rope
like form."
	  "Tow is used for the same purpose for which staple
fibre is
1009
used. Tow  is mainly  converted into staple fibre and only a
negligible quantity  is converted directly into yarn. It has
been therefore	decided that duty should be levied on Tow at
the rate  applicable to	 staple fibre  (MF (DR	& I)  F. No.
50/7/71-CX 2 dt. 22.12.72)".
     In other  words, Tow  is fibre  in running	 length	 and
staple fibre  is obtained  by cutting it into required short
length.	 On   an  examination	of  the	  material  and	 the
contention, the	 Tribunal came	to the	conclusion that	 the
material which	the respondents	 had purchased	was  already
man-made  fibre	  but  in   running  length.  All  that	 the
respondents did in relation to it, was to cut it into staple
length after  some manual  sorting  and	 straightening.	 The
question, therefore,  is whether cutting the long fibre into
short fibre  resulted into  a new  and different articles of
commerce. Now  it is  well settled  how to determine whether
there was manufacture or not. This Court held in the case of
Union of  India v.  Delhi Cloth	 & General  Mills, [1963]  1
Suppl  SCR  586	 that  'manufacture'  means  to	 bring	into
existence a  new substance  and	 does  not  mean  merely  to
produce some  change in	 a substance (emphasis supplied). It
is  true   that	 etymological  word  'manufacture'  properly
construed would	 doubtless cover  the transformation but the
question  is   whether	that   transformation  brings  about
fundamental  change,   a  new	substance  is  brought	into
existence or  a new  different	article	 having	 distinctive
name, character	 or use results from a particular process or
a particular  activity. The  taxable event  under the Excise
Law  is	  'manufacture'.  See	in  this  connection  Empire
Industries Ltd.	 & Ors.	 etc. v. Union of India & Ors. etc.,
[1985] Suppl.  1 SCR page 292 and M/s Ujagar Prints v. Union
of India,  [1986] Suppl.  SCC 652. In the instant case it is
not disputed  that what	 the appellant	did, was  to cut the
running length	fibre (tow)  into short length fibre (staple
fibre). It indubitably brought a change in the substance but
did not	 bring into existence a new substance. The character
and use of the substance (man-made fibre) remained the same.
It is true that by the change in the length of the fibre, it
acquired a new name. But since in this case the tariff entry
recognised the	single description  'man-made fibre' with no
further sub-division  based on	length of the fibre and even
without any  distinct enumeration  of the  various forms  of
fibre  by   cutting  long   fibres  into   short  ones,	 the
respondents did	 not bring into existence any new product so
as to  attract any levy under the same tariff entry. Even by
cutting,  the  respondents  obtained  man-made	fibre.	Such
cutting, therefore,  involved no  manufacture and, hence, no
duty liability can be imposed upon them.
1010
     In that  view of  the matter  and on the facts found by
the Tribunal,  we are  of the  opinion that the Tribunal was
right in  the view  it	took  and  that	 decision  needs  no
interference. This  appeal, therefore, cannot be entertained
and is accordingly dismissed.
N.V.K.					   Appeal dismissed.
1011




