

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
State Of Gujarat vs Jat Laxmanji Talasji on 19 February, 1988Equivalent citations: 1988 AIR  825, 1988 SCR  (2)1068
Author: M Thakkar
Bench: Thakkar, M.P. (J)
           PETITIONER:
STATE OF GUJARAT

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
JAT LAXMANJI TALASJI

DATE OF JUDGMENT19/02/1988

BENCH:
THAKKAR, M.P. (J)
BENCH:
THAKKAR, M.P. (J)
SINGH, K.N. (J)
OJHA, N.D. (J)

CITATION:
 1988 AIR  825		  1988 SCR  (2)1068
 1988 SCC  (2) 341	  JT 1988 (1)	382
 1988 SCALE  (1)350


ACT:
     Gujarat Agricultural  Land Ceiling	 Act, 1960:s. 6(3B)-
Benefit of  enlargement	 of  ceiling  area-Availability	 of-
Family	consisting  of	more  than  five  members  including
members of specified category-Computation of ceiling area.



HEADNOTE:
%
     Section 6(3B)  of the Gujarat Agricultural Land Ceiling
Act of	1960 entitles a family, consisting of more than five
members	 comprising  a	person	and  other  members  of	 the
categories mentioned  therein, viz.(i) minor son, (ii) widow
of pre-deceased	 son, (iii)  minor son or unmarried daughter
of a  pre-deceased son,	 where his or her mother is dead, to
hold land  in excess  of the  ceiling area  to the extent of
one-fifth of  such area	 for each  member in excess of five,
provided the  total area  does not  exceed twice the ceiling
area. The ceiling area prescribed was 45 acres.
     The family	 of the	 respondent landholder	consisted of
nine members  including himself,  his  mother,	wife,  three
minor sons  and three  minor daughters.	 The holding  of the
family consisted of 60 acres and 4 gunthas.
     The Revenue  Tribunal held	 that the landholder was not
entitled to  the benefit  of s.6(3B) of the Act. In counting
the members  of the  family, it	 excluded from consideration
the mother  and three  minor daughters	of the landholder on
the view  that the applicant and his wife would count as one
unit and  his minor sons would count as four units and ruled
that there  were only  five members  in the  family for	 the
purpose of  counting the unit, notwithstanding the fact that
the family  consisted of  nine members and also comprised of
other members belonging to the specified category.
     In the  writ petition,  the High  Court held  that	 the
landholder's family  consisted of  nine members	 inasmuch as
his mother  and his  wife as  also his	minor daughters were
members of his family.
     In the  appeal to	this Court  it was contended for the
appellant-State that in applying the test whether or not the
family consisted of five
1069
members regard	must be	 had only  to the  members of family
belonging to  the specified  category, namely minor sons, in
so far	as the	composition of	the family of the landholder
was concerned,	so to say, that the landholder, his wife and
his three  minor sons  were the	 only five  members  of	 the
family for the purpose of s. 6(3B) of the Act.
     Dismissing the appeal,
^
     HELD: 1.1	Two tests must be satisfied cumulatively for
being eligible	to claim  the benefit  of s.  6(3B)  of	 the
Gujarat Agricultural Land Ceiling Act, 1960: (1) the size of
the family  should exceed  five,  (2)  it  must	 consist  of
members one  or more  of whom  belong to one or other of the
specified categories.  All the	ingredients of	s. 6(3B) are
satisfied in the instant case.[1074G]
     1.2 The expression "family" has not been defined in the
Act. The  Court has,  therefore, to  go by  the	 concept  by
family as  it is  commonly understood,	meaning, a  group of
persons consisting  of parents	and their  offsprings living
together in  one household. In that view, that family of the
landholder consisted of eight members including himself, his
wife, three minor sons and three minor daughters. The family
of the	landholder thus	 consists of more than five members.
The family  also includes  persons of  one of  the specified
categories viz., the minor sons. [1074A-C, E-F]
     2. It  cannot be  said that  in ascertaining whether or
not the	 precondition is  satisfied only  the members of the
specified category  should be taken into account. For, to do
so would  be to kill the letter as well as the spirit of the
benevolent provisions  aimed at	 relieving the	distress  of
family members subject to one or other of the socio-economic
handicaps. [1075D-E; 1071C-D]
     3. Computation  of the  extent of	the additional	land
must be	 made by  applying the formula embodied in s. 6(3B).
On a  true interpretation  of the  provision "each member in
excess of  five" must  of logical necessity mean each "such"
member of  the specified  handicapped  category	 viz.  three
minor sons.  Under the	circumstances, for each minor son in
excess of  the five members, the holder was entitled to one-
fifth of  the ceiling  area  in	 excess	 of  the  prescribed
ceiling. That  is to  say he  was entitled to three-fifth of
the prescribed	ceiling area over and above the ceiling area
provided the  total retainable holding of the family did not
exceed twice  the ceiling  area. The  holding of  the family
consisted  of	60  acres   and	 4  gunthas.  And  making  a
computation on the aforesaid basis
1070
having regard  to the  fact that  the ceiling  area  was  45
acres, the  family would  be entitled to additional 27 acres
(45/5=9x3=27). Thus  he would  be entitled  to hold 72 acres
(45+27=72) whereas  the holding	 of the respondent consisted
of only	 60 acres.  Therefore, the holding of the family was
not in	excess of  the prescribed ceiling as computed in the
aforesaid manner. [1075F-G; 1076B-C]
     Nathekhan	v.  Mamlatdar,	Vadgam,	 G.L.R.	 25(3)	1473
approved.



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Civil  Appeal No. 681 of
1985.
     From the  Judgment and  Order dated 24.8.84 of the High
Court of Gujarat in S.C.A. No. 1286/1980.
     T.V.  Mehta,  M.N.	 Shroff	 and  K.M.M.  Khan  for	 the
Appellant.
     S.H.  Sheth,   Vimal  Dave	  and  S.C.  Patel  for	 the
Respondents.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     THAKKAR,  J.   In	the   course  of   an  exercise	  in
interpretation of  a provision,	 Section  6(3B)	 of  Gujarat
Agricultural  Land   Ceiling  Act   of	1960  complains	 the
appellant-state, the  High Court has misinterpreted the said
provision  which  had  been  correctly	interpreted  by	 the
Tribunal Gujarat Revenue Tribunal. The debate in the present
appeal has  centred on	this plea the meritlessness of which
will become evident presently.
     The  provision   in  question  viz,  Section  6(3B)  is
embodied in  Chapter III  of the Ceiling Act which bears the
caption "Fixation  of Ceiling on Holding Land, Determination
of Surplus  Land and  Acquisition  thereof".  The  concerned
provision in  so far as material to the problem posed by the
present appeal deserves to be quoted:
	  "6(3B)    Where a family or a joint family
		    consists of more than five members
		    comprising a person and other members
		    belonging to all or any of the following
		    categories, namely:
	  (i)  minor son,
	  (ii) widow of a pre-deceased son,
1071
	  (iii)	    minor son  or unmarried  daughter  of  a
		    pre-deceased  son,	 where	his  or	 her
		    mother is dead,
	  such family  shall be	 entitled to  hold  land  in
	  excess of  the ceiling  area to the extent of one-
	  fifth of  the ceiling	 area  for  each  member  in
	  excess of  five, so however that the total holding
	  of the  family does  not exceed  twice the ceiling
	  area; and  in such  a case,  in  relation  to	 the
	  holding of  such family, such area shall be deemed
	  to be the ceiling area:
	  Provided x x x x x x"
     The philosophy  of this  provision stares	one  in	 the
eyes. When  a family  is both  large  and  comprises  (which
expression is  employed in  the sense  of includes, Collins'
dictionary defines  comprise as ..... to include ... amongst
it members  who are  subject to	 one or	 other of the socio-
economic handicaps,  fairness demands  that such  family  is
permitted to retain some more land than other families which
are not	 so  handicapped.  The	very  nature  of  the  three
categories which  are specified	 (minors, widow	 of  a	pre-
deceased  son,	 minor	son   or  unmarried  daughter  of  a
predeceased son	 who has  lost both  parents)  conveys	this
message of  plight. Understandable  it is,  that for  such a
family	which  has  to	carry  the  burden  of	misery,	 the
community acting  through the  legislature has a soft corner
and pours  milk	 of  human  kindness  into  this  benevolent
provision aimed	 at relieving  their distress  to an extent.
Such  is   the	design.	  Two  tests   must   be   satisfied
commulatively for being eligible to claim the benefit:
     (1)  The size  of the  family (No.	 of  members  should
	  exceed 5)
     (2)  It must  consist of  members one  or more  of whom
	  belong  to   one  or	 other	of   the   specified
	  handicapped categories.
Now  the   factual  backdrop   in  which   the	problem	  of
interpretation has  surfaced needs  to be traced. The family
of  the	  respondent  landholder   consisted  of  9  members
including himself.  (The land-holder,  his mother, his wife,
his three  minor sons  and his	three minor  daughters). The
question  which	  arose	 was  whether  the  land-holder	 was
entitled to the benefit of Section 6(3B) which provides that
where a	 family or  a joint  family consists  of more than 5
members comprising  a person  and other persons belonging to
all or any of the specified categories, such family shall be
entitled to  hold land	in excess of the ceiling area to the
extent of  1/5 of  the ceiling	area for  each member of the
specified
1072
category in  excess of	five, subject  to the rider that the
total holding  of the  family  does  not  exceed  twice	 the
ceiling area.  The Tribunal took the view that Section 6(3B)
was not	 attracted to  the  case  of  the  said	 land-holder
notwithstanding the  fact that	his family  consisted  of  9
members and  also comprised  of other  members belonging  to
specified category  (i) (minor	son). The  view taken by the
Tribunal is  reflected in  the following  passage  extracted
from its order dated January 24, 1978 which gave rise to the
Writ Petition in the High Court which in turn has given rise
to the present appeal by special leave:
	  "As regards  the other  contention  of  Shri	R.K.
	  Panchal, it  may be  observed that for the purpose
	  of section 6(3B) family of the applicant consisted
	  of not  more than  five members  eventhough  as  a
	  matter of  fact there	 are  nine  members  in	 his
	  family because  the applicant	 and his  wife	will
	  count as one unit and his minor sons will count as
	  four units for the purpose of section 6(3B) of the
	  Act, and  thus there	are only five members in the
	  family for  the  purpose  of	counting  the  unit.
	  Therefore, the family is not entitled to hold more
	  than 45 acres of land on the ground that there are
	  nine members	in the family as argued by Shri R.K.
	  Panchal. In  this view of the matter, the findings
	  of the  Mamlatdar  and  confirmed  by	 the  Deputy
	  Collector do not deserve to be interfered with."
     Upon the jurisdiction of the High Court, under Articles
226/227 of the Constitution of India being invoked, the High
Court reversed the Tribunal. Because, the reasoning unfolded
in  the	  aforesaid  passage   was  inconsistent   with	 the
exposition of  law made	 by the	 High Court  in its  earlier
pronouncement. Reliance	 was placed  on Nathekhan's  Gujarat
Law Reporter  Vol. XXV	(3) p. 1473 (Nathekhan v. Mamlatdar,
Vadgam) case wherein Ahmadi, J. had earlier taken a contrary
view. Says Ahmadi, J.
	  "With respect the Tribunal's thinking is confused,
	  Sub-section (3B)  of Sec.  6 merely lays down that
	  where a  family consists of more than five members
	  comprising a	person	and  other  members  of	 the
	  categories mentioned	therein, namely,  (i)  minor
	  son, (ii) widow of a pre-deceased son, (iii) Minor
	  son or  unmarried daughter  of a pre-deceased son,
	  where his or her mother is dead, such family shall
	  be entitled  to hold land in excess of the ceiling
	  area to  the extent  of one-fifth  of the  ceiling
	  area for each member in
1073
	  excess of  five provided  the total holding of the
	  family does  not exceed  twice the ceiling area. A
	  bare perusal	of this	 sub-section makes  it clear
	  that in  order to  avail two	conditions  must  be
	  satisfied, namely,  (i) the  family should consist
	  of more  than five members and (ii) it should have
	  amongst it  the categories of members mentioned in
	  the three  sub-clauses. If  the  family  does	 not
	  consist of  more than five members but has amongst
	  it any  of the members mentioned in the three sub-
	  clauses, it will not be entitled to the benefit of
	  enlargement of  the ceiling  area. Therefore,	 the
	  benefit of  enlargement of  the ceiling  area will
	  ensure to  only that family where the total number
	  of members  is more than five and amongst them are
	  members  belonging  to  the  categories  mentioned
	  therein. However,  there is  nothing in  the	sub-
	  section wherefrom  it can  be	 inferred  that	 the
	  wife, widowed	 mother and  unmarried daughters are
	  intended to  be excluded  from the family, that is
	  group or  unit  constituting	the  family.  I	 am,
	  therefore of	the opinion that all the authorities
	  including the Tribunal were wrong in coming to the
	  conclusion that  the aforesaid  female members  of
	  the family  had to  be excluded for the purpose of
	  determining the size of the family."
     We fully concur with this view. The reasons are not far
to seek.
     It is not in dispute that the family of the land-holder
consisted of  9 members	 if the	 heads of the members of the
family are  counted. The  first	 condition  required  to  be
satisfied in  order to	attract Section	 6(3B) is  that	 the
family must  consist of	 more than 5 members. The debate has
centred round  the question  as to  how the  number  of	 the
members	 constituting  the  family  should  be	counted.  In
counting the members of the family the Tribunal has excluded
from consideration  the mother and the three minor daughters
of the	land holder. Excluding these four persons the family
consisted of 5 members. In that event Section 6(3B) will not
be attracted because one of the conditions precedent for the
applicability of  the provision	 is  that  the	family	must
consist of  more than 5 members. The High Court on the other
hand has  upheld the  contention of the land holder that his
family in fact consisted of 9 members inasmuch as his mother
and his wife as also his minor daughters were members of his
family. The Tribunal in terms observed that:
	  "for the  purpose of	Section 6(3B)  family of the
	  applicant consisted  of not  more than  5  members
	  eventhough as a
1074
	  matter of fact there are 9 members in his family."
     This reasoning  is obviously fallacious. The expression
'family' has  not been defined in the Act. One has therefore
to go by the concept of family as it is commonly understood,
taking	into   account	the   dictionary  meaning   of	 the
expression. Collins English Dictionary defines family as:
	  "a primary  social group consisting of parents and
	  their offspring,  the principal  function of which
	  is provision for its members."
	  "a group  of persons	related by  blood;  a  group
	  descended from a common ancestor."
	  "all	the   persons	living	 together   in	 one
	  household."
     Having regard  to this  definition	 it  can  be  safely
concluded that	the land-holder,  his wife and his offspring
consisting of  three minor  sons and  three minor  daughters
would certainly	 constitute a  family even  if the mother of
the land  holder is excluded from consideration. Thus in any
view the  family of  the land  holder consisted of 8 members
including himself,  his wife,  three minor  sons  and  three
minor daughters. The Tribunal was therefore clearly in error
in taking  the view  that the  family consisted	 of not more
than 5	members. Learned  counsel for  the appellant however
contended that	in applying  the test  whether	or  not	 the
family consisted of 5 members regard must be had only to the
members of  the family	belonging to  the specified category
namely minor sons in so far as the composition of the family
of the	land holder  in the  present case  is concerned.  In
other words the contention is that the land holder, his wife
and his	 three minor  sons are	the only five persons of the
family for  the purposes  of Section  6(3B). In	 our opinion
there is  no warrant  for  reading  Section  6(3B)  in	this
artificial and truncated manner. On a plain reading, Section
6(3B) is  attracted where  a family  consists of more than 5
members "comprising  a person and other members belonging to
all or	any one	 of the	 following categories viz. (i) minor
son ....." In the present case the family of the land holder
consists of  more than	5 members.  The family also includes
persons of  one of  the specified  categories viz. the minor
sons.  Thus,  all  the	ingredients  of	 Section  6(3B)	 are
satisfied. In  order to	 claim benefit	of Section 6(3B) the
test which  must be  satisfied is  a two  fold test.  First,
whether the  claimant's family	consists of  more than	five
persons. In  the present  case the answer to this test is in
the affirmative.
1075
The second test that is required to be answered in favour of
the person  who claims	the benefit of Section 6(3B) is that
such family  must also	comprise of one individual and other
members besides himself who must belong to all or any of the
three specified	 categories. This  test is  also answered in
favour	of  the	 respondent  inasmuch  as  the	family	does
comprise of the respondent and other members and from out of
the other  members, three  belong to  one of  the  specified
categories viz. 'minor son'. In otherwords access to Section
6(3B) is  barred by  two doors. In order to secure entry the
family must  consist of	 more than  5 persons.	If there are
more than  5 persons  including the land holder himself, the
first door  will be  opened and	 the  land  holder  will  be
entitled to have an access provided the second door does not
bar his	 entry inside  the beneficial  area. The second door
will also  be opened provided that some of the other members
meaning thereby	 members other	than individual	 land holder
belong to  one of  the three  categories  specified  in	 the
section. The second door would be opened provided he has got
minor sons. Admittedly, the respondent has three minor sons.
Therefore both	the doors  which bar  the access of the land
holder to  the benevolent  provisions are  opened. It is not
possible to  accede to	the submission	that in ascertaining
whether or  not the  pre-condition  is	satisfied  only	 the
members of  the specified  category  should  be	 taken	into
account. For,  to do  so would be to kill the letter as well
as the	spirit of  the concerned provision. We are therefore
not prepared  to uphold the plea of the appellant-state that
the High  Court has  not correctly  interpreted the relevant
provision in the case giving rise to the present appeal.
     Under the	circumstances the  appeal deserves  to fail.
But before  we conclude	 we must  set aright  an inadvertent
error made  by the  High Court	in making computation of the
extent of  the additional  land	 which	the  respondent	 was
entitled to  hold in excess of the prescribed ceiling in the
context of section 6(3B). Computation in this behalf must be
made by	 applying the formula embodied in Section 6(3B) viz.
that the  family shall be entitled to hold land in excess of
the ceiling  area to the extent of "one fifth of the ceiling
area for each member in excess of five" subject to the rider
that the  total area does not exceed twice the ceiling area.
It needs  to be	 clarified that	 on a true interpretation of
the provision  "each member  in	 excess	 of  five"  must  of
logical necessity  mean each  'such' member of the specified
handicapped category.  In the  present	case  there  were  3
members in  the family	and it comprised of three members of
the  specified	 category  viz.	 3  minor  sons.  Under	 the
circumstances for  each minor  son in  excess  of  the	five
members the holder was entitled to 1/5th of the ceiling area
in excess of the pre-
1076
scribed ceiling.  That is to say he was entitled to 3/5th of
the prescribed	ceiling over  and  above  the  ceiling	area
subject to  the rider  that the	 total retainable holding of
the family  did not  exceed twice  the	ceiling	 area.	This
aspect was  lost sight	of by  the High	 Court in making the
computation. Of	 course in  the ultimate result in the facts
of the	present case  nothing turns  on it as in any view of
the matter  the extent	of  the	 land  held  by	 the  family
computed on  this basis	 would not  exceed twice the ceiling
area. The  holding of the family consisted of 60 acres and 4
gunthas. And  making a	computation on	the aforesaid  basis
having regard  to the  fact that  the ceiling  area  was  45
acres, the  family would  be entitled to additional 27 acres
(45/5=9x3=27). Thus  he would  be entitled  to hold 72 acres
(45+27=72) whereas  the holding	 of respondent	consisted of
only 60	 acres. Therefore  the holding of the family was not
in excess  of the  prescribed ceiling  as  computed  in	 the
aforesaid manner. While the High Court in terms followed its
earlier decision  in Nathekhan's  case (supra) it overlooked
the  ratio   of	 the  decision	in  this  behalf.  What	 was
overlooked was	the ratio reflected in the passage from para
6 of  the decision  extracted hereinbelow which is in accord
with formula indicated by us:
	  "...... There were two minor sons in the family of
	  Nathekhan and	 one minor  son	 in  the  family  of
	  Majamkhan. Since  the family	unit of each brother
	  exceeded five	 in number  so far  as Nathekhan  is
	  concerned, he	 was entitled to hold land in excess
	  of the  ceiling area to the extent of two-fifth of
	  the ceiling  area and Majamkhan with one minor son
	  was entitled to hold land in excess of the ceiling
	  area to the extent of one-fifth thereof. Since the
	  excess land  in the  case of each brother was of 4
	  acres and  38.5 gunthas  being less than even one-
	  fifth of  the ceiling	 area, it  could not be held
	  that	their	holding	 exceeded   the	 permissible
	  ceiling."
     We are  therefore	of  the	 opinion  that	this  appeal
deserves to  fail subject  to the clarification in regard to
the true  position as regards computation of the permissible
extent of  land which  can be held in the context of section
6(3B) of  the Act.  The appeal	is disposed  of accordingly.
There will be no order regarding costs.
P.S.S.					   Appeal dismissed.
1077




