

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Tejinder Kaur vs Gurmit Singh on 23 February, 1988Equivalent citations: 1988 SCR  (2)1098, 1988 SCC  (2)	 90
Author: A Sen
Bench: Sen, A.P. (J)
           PETITIONER:
TEJINDER KAUR

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
GURMIT SINGH

DATE OF JUDGMENT23/02/1988

BENCH:
SEN, A.P. (J)
BENCH:
SEN, A.P. (J)
RAY, B.C. (J)

CITATION:
 1988 SCR  (2)1098	  1988 SCC  (2)	 90
 JT 1988 (1)   395	  1988 SCALE  (1)398


ACT:
     Constitution of  India, 1950:  Article  136-Decree	 for
dissolution of	marriage-Upheld by  High  Court-Wife  filing
SLP-Husband contracting	 second	 marriage  one	month  after
dismissal of  appeal  by  High	Court-SLP  whether  rendered
infructuous.
     Hindu Marriage Act, 1955: Section 15-Effect of deletion
of proviso by Marriage Laws (Amendment) Act, 1976-Decree for
dissolution of	marriage  upheld  by  High  Court-SLP  under
Article 136  of Constitution  of India filed by wife-Husband
marrying again	one month  after  dismissal  of	 High  Court
appeal-Preliminary objection  that SLP rendered infructuous-
Whether maintainable.
     Limitation	 Act,	1963:  Article	 113(c)-Decree	 for
dissolution  of	  marriage-Upheld  by  High  Court-SLP-Filed
within 90  days by wife-Husband meanwhile contracting second
marriage-Whether SLP rendered infructuous.



HEADNOTE:
%
     Section 15	 of the	 Hindu Marriage	 Act, 1955  provided
that when  a marriage  was dissolved by a decree of divorce,
it shall be lawful for either of the spouses to marry again,
where either there was no right of appeal or where there was
such a right of appeal, the time for appealing, had expired,
without the appeal being presented or the appeal having been
presented, was	dismissed. Proviso  to the  section provided
that it	 shall not  be lawful  for either of them to remarry
unless at  the date  of such  marriage at least one year had
elapsed from  the date	of decree  in  the  court  of  first
instance. This	proviso was  deleted by	 the  Marriage	Laws
(Amendment) Act, 1976.
     A decree for dissolution of marriage was granted by the
Additional District Judge against the petitioner-wife on the
ground of  cruelty under  s. 13(i-a)  of the  Hindu Marriage
Act, 1955.  The petitioner-wife's  appeal to  the High Court
was dismissed in limine.
     The petitioner-wife  filed a  Special Leave Petition in
this Court.  A preliminary objection was raised on behalf of
the respondent-husband
1099
that the  petition had	become infructuous  inasmuch as	 the
respondent-husband  had	 meanwhile  married  again  on	17th
August, 1986,  just a  month  after  the  dismissal  of	 the
petitioner's appeal by the High Court.
     Over ruling the preliminary objection and directing the
Special Leave Petition to be placed for hearing,
^
     HELD: Under  the law  laid down  in the  Hindu Marriage
Act, 1955,  monogamy is	 the  rule  and	 a  party  can	only
contract valid	second marriage	 after the  first ceases  to
exist in  the manner  envisaged by  s. 15.  This rule  is an
integral part  of the  proceedings by  which alone  both the
parties to  the decree can be released from their incapacity
to contract a fresh marriage. [1102E-F]
     Prior to  the Amendment  Act of 1976, the proviso to s.
15 laid	 down a	 period of  waiting of	one year between the
passing of  a decree  for divorce  by  the  court  of  first
instance and  the remarriage  of any  of  the  spouses.	 The
deletion of  this proviso,  by the  Marriage Laws (Amendment
Act), 1976  and doing  away with  the period  of waiting has
given rise to a question of great difficulty. [1103A-B]
     The section,  when it speaks of a case where there is a
"right of  appeal" does	 not in	 terms cover  the case of an
application for special leave to appeal to the Supreme Court
under Article 136 of the Constitution. [1103B-C]
     Under Article  133(c) of  the Limitation  Act,  1963  a
special leave  petition can be filed within 90 days from the
date of	 the disposal  of the  appeal  by  the	High  Court.
Therefore, a  successful party cannot take away the right of
presenting an  application from the other spouse by marrying
immediately after  the High  Court's judgment  and must wait
till  that   period  was  over	and  make  sure	 whether  an
application for	 special leave has been filed in the Supreme
Court. [1103C-D]
     Chandra Mohini  Srivastava v. Avinash Prasad Srivastava
JUDGMENT:
Ors., [1978] 3 SCR 922, followed.
     In the  instant case,  the High  Court having dismissed
the appeal  on 16th  July, 1986,  the petitioner  could have
presented  a  special  leave  petition	within	ninety	days
therefrom i.e.	till 14th  September, 1986. Till that period
was over,  it was not lawful for either party to marry again
as provided by s. 15. [1104C-D]
1100
     Though the	 respondent has	 denied any knowledge of the
filing of  the appeal in the High Court or of its dismissal,
and has	 justified the	second marriage	 on August 17, 1986,
this has  been controverted  by the  petitioner, by filing a
copy of the registered notice dated May 31, 1986, intimating
the  respondent	 of  the  filing  of  the  appeal.  It	was,
therefore, incumbent  on the  respondent  to  have  apprised
himself as to whether the appeal in the High Court was still
pending; and if not, whether the period for filing a special
leave petition to this Court had expired. [1104A-C]
     Catterall v. Sweetman, [1845] 9 Jur. 951, 954, referred
to.

&
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Special  Leave  Petition
(Civil) No. 13306 of 1986.
     From the Judgment and order dated 16.7.1986 of the High
Court of  Punjab and  Haryana in First Appeal from Order No.
110/M of 1986, and Civil Misc. No. 3087 C11 of 1986.
     Mrs.  Sarla   Chandra  and	  Girish  Chandra   for	 the
Petitioner.
     Mukul Mudgal and P.K. Jain for the Respondent.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     SEN, J.  In this  special leave  petition by  the	wife
against the  decree for	 dissolution of	 marriage granted by
the Additional	District Judge,	 Patiala dated	29th  March,
1986 on	 the ground  of cruelty under s. 13(ia) of the Hindu
Marriage Act,  1955, against  which the	 petitioner-wife had
preferred an  appeal to	 the Punjab & Haryana High Court and
which the  High Court  by its  order dated  16th July,	1986
dismissed in  limine, a preliminary objection is raised that
the  petition	has  become   infructuous  inasmuch  as	 the
respondent-husband has	in the	meanwhile married  again  on
17th August,  1986 i.e.	 just after a month of the dismissal
of her appeal.
     It is  not necessary  to state the facts in any detail.
It is enough to say that the learned District Judge held the
wife  guilty   of  mental  cruelty  for	 having	 voluntarily
deprived the  husband of  her society and cohabitation for a
long period as, according to him, marriage without sex is an
anathema. He  further held that the wife had falsely charged
the husband  with adultery.  It is  quite evident  on  these
facts that the marriage has irretrievably broken.
1101
     We heard  learned	counsel	 for  the  parties  and	 the
question is  whether the  condition pre-requisite  before  a
lawful	marriage   can	take   place  after   a	 decree	 for
dissolution of	marriage under	s. 15  of the  Act has	been
fulfilled. Prior  to its  amendment  by	 the  Marriage	Laws
(Amendment) Act,  1976 by  which the proviso was deleted, s.
15 was in these terms:
	  "15. When  a marriage	 has  been  dissolved  by  a
	  decree of  divorce and either there is no right of
	  appeal against  the decree  or, if there is such a
	  right	 of  appeal,  the  time	 for  appealing	 has
	  expired without  an appeal  having been presented,
	  or an	 appeal has  been  presented  but  has	been
	  dismissed, it	 shall be lawful for either party to
	  the marriage to marry again.
	       Provided that  it shall not be lawful for the
	  respective parties  to marry	again unless  at the
	  date of  such	 marriage  at  least  one  year	 has
	  elapsed from	the date  of the decree in the court
	  of the first instance."
					   Emphasis supplied
     Prior to the Amendment Act of 1976, the proviso to s. 5
laid down  a period  of waiting	 of  one  year	between	 the
passing of  a decree  for divorce  by  the  Court  of  first
instance and  the remarriage  of any  of  the  spouses.	 The
Allahabad High	Court in  Lila Gupta  v.  Laxminarayan,	 ILR
(1969) 1  All 92  and the  Calcutta High Court in Uma Charan
Roy v.	Smt. Kajal  Roy, AIR  (1971) Cal. 307 held that such
period of  waiting  was	 enjoined  on  the  parties  in	 the
interests of  public policy and morality so as to discourage
divorcees from	entering into  fresh matrimony	and to avoid
confusion of  parentage. It  was pointed  out that  even  in
Mohammadan law	a divorced  wife is  expected to  marry	 any
other man  only after  the expiry  of the period of iddat to
avoid a danger of confusion of paternity. It was accordingly
held that  the prohibition  being mandatory, if any divorced
party married  again within  a	period	of  one	 year,	such
marriage was  nullity. That view however did not find favour
with this Court in Lila Gupta v. Laxmi Narain & Ors., [1978]
3 SCR  922 and	it was	held that  a marriage  contracted in
contravention of  the rule relating to one year laid down in
the proviso  would not	be void.  The Court  referred to the
following observations	of Dr.	Lushington in  Catterall  v.
Sweetman, [1845] 9 Jur. 951, 954:
	  "The words in this section are negative words, and
	  are clearly  prohibitory of the marriage being had
	  without the
1102
	  prescribed requisites,  but whether  the  marriage
	  itself is  void ........  is a  question  of	very
	  great difficulty.  It is  to be  recollected	that
	  there are  no	 words	in  the	 Act  rendering	 the
	  marriage void,  and I	 have sought in vain for any
	  case in  which a  marriage has  been declared null
	  and void  unless there  were words  in the statute
	  expressly   so    declaring	it   ....From	this
	  examination of  these Acts I draw two conclusions.
	  First, that  there never  appears to	have been  a
	  decision where  words in  a  statute	relating  to
	  marriage, though  prohibitory and  negative,	have
	  been held  to infer a nullity, unless such nullity
	  was declared	in the	Act. Secondly, that, viewing
	  the successive  marriage  Acts,  it  appears	that
	  prohibitory  words,	without	 a   declaration  of
	  nullity, were not considered by the legislature to
	  create a nullity."
It was observed that a decree for divorce breaks the marital
tie and	 the parties  forfeit the status of husband and wife
in relation to each other. But there was nothing in s. 15 of
the Act to make that marriage a nullity. The reason for this
was an	incapacity for	second marriage for a certain period
does not  have the effect of treating the former marriage as
subsisting.
     Under the	law laid down in this enactment, monogamy is
the rule  and a	 party can  only  contract  a  valid  second
marriage after	the first  ceases to  exist  in	 the  manner
envisaged by s. 15. The rule laid down in this section is an
integral part  of the  proceedings by  which alone  both the
parties to  the decree of divorce can be released from their
incapacity to  contract a fresh marriage. The Law Commission
in its	59th Report  on Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 and Special
Marriage Act,  1954 however  suggested the  deletion of	 the
proviso to s. 15 which laid down that it shall not be lawful
for the respective parties to marry again unless at the date
of such marriage at least one year has elapsed from the date
of the	decree in  the Court  of the first instance, for the
reason extracted below:
	  "The consideration  of  the  parties,	 freedom  to
	  marry	 and   the  inconvenience   caused  by	 the
	  prohibition to  remarry, out-weighed	the two-fold
	  purpose, i.e.	 avoiding confusion of parentage and
	  checking an  attempt to  obtain divorce  from	 one
	  woman with the specific object of marrying another
	  woman."
1103
     Parliament accordingly by the Marriage Laws (Amendment)
Act, 1976  has done  away with	the  period  of	 waiting  by
deleting the  proviso. In Lila Gupta's case, this Court held
that the  effect of  deleting the  proviso is  that  parties
whose marriage	is dissolved  by a  decree for	divorce	 can
contract marriage  soon thereafter  provided, of course, the
period	of   appeal  has   expired  and	  that	all  pending
proceedings have  to be	 decided as  if the  proviso had not
been applicable.  The deletion of the proviso has given rise
to a  question of  great difficulty.  The  section  when  it
speaks of a case where there is a 'right of appeal' does not
in terms cover a case of an application for special leave to
appeal	to   the  Supreme   Court  under  Art.	136  of	 the
Constitution.
 In	 Chandra   Mohini  Srivastava	v.  Avinash   Prasad
Srivastava &  Anr., [1967]  1 SCR  864, on  somewhat similar
facts it  was held that though s. 15 in terms does not apply
to a case of special leave to appeal to the Supreme Court, a
spouse who  has won  in the  High Court	 and got a decree of
dissolution of marriage cannot by marrying immediately after
the High  Court's Judgment take away the right of presenting
an application	for special  leave to  appeal from the other
spouse. It  was further	 held that the successful party must
wait  for  a  reasonable  time	and  make  sure	 whether  an
application for	 special leave has been filed in this Court.
Wanchoo, J. speaking for a two-Judge Bench said:
	  "It is  true that s. 15 does not in terms apply to
	  a case of an application for special leave to this
	  Court. Even  so, we  are of opinion that the party
	  who has  won in the High Court and got a decree of
	  dissolution  of   marriage  cannot   by   marrying
	  immediately after  the High  Court's	decree	take
	  away	from   the  losing   party  the	  chance  of
	  presenting an	 application for special leave. Even
	  though s. 15 may not apply in terms and it may not
	  have been  unlawful for  the first  respondent  to
	  have married	immediately after  the High  Court's
	  decree, for  no appeal  as of	 right lies from the
	  decree of  the High  Court to	 this Court  in this
	  matter, we  still think  that it was for the first
	  respondent to make sure whether an application for
	  special leave	 had been filed in this Court and he
	  could not  by marrying  immediately after the High
	  Court's decree deprive the appellant of the chance
	  to present a special leave petition to this Court.
	  If a	person does  so, he  takes a risk and cannot
	  ask this Court to revoke the special leave on this
	  ground."
     In the  present case,  the respondent  in the  counter-
affidavit has
1104
denied any  knowledge of  the fact  that an  appeal had been
preferred  in  the  High  Court	 or  of	 its  dismissal	 and
therefore asserts  that he  was justified  in contracting  a
second marriage	 on 17th August, 1986 i.e. immediately after
the expiry  of one  month from	the date  of the  decree  of
dissolution of	marriage passed	 by the	 learned  Additional
District Judge.	 This fact is controverted by the petitioner
in her	affidavit-in-reply. She	 has placed  a copy  of	 the
registered  notice  dated  31st	 May,  1986  intimating	 the
respondent of the filing of the appeal.
     In view  of this, it was incumbent on the respondent to
have enquired about the fate of the appeal. At any rate, the
High Court  having dismissed  the appeal  on 16th July, 1986
the petitioner could have presented a special leave petition
within ninety  days  therefrom	under  Art.  133(c)  of	 the
Limitation Act,	 1963 i.e.  till 14th  September, 1986. Till
that period  was over, it was not lawful for either party to
marry again  as provided  by s.	 15. It was incumbent on the
respondent,  as	 observed  in  Lila  Gupta's  case  to	have
apprised himself  as to whether the appeal in the High Court
was still pending; and if not, whether the period for filing
a special  leave petition to this Court had expired. We must
accordingly overrule the preliminary objection following the
views expressed	 in Chandra Mohini's and Lila Gupta's cases.
We wish to add that in the subsequent decision in Lila Gupta
the Court  while dealing  with the effect of deletion of the
proviso observed:
	  "The net  result is  that now	 since the amendment
	  parties whose marriage is dissolved by a decree of
	  divorce  can	contract  marriage  soon  thereafter
	  provided  of	course	the  period  of	 appeal	 has
	  expired."
The Court  adverted to	the word  of caution administered by
Wanchoo, J. in Chandra Mohini's case and reiterated:
	  "Even, though	 it may	 not have  been unlawful for
	  the husband  to have married immediately after the
	  High Court's decree for no appeal as of right lies
	  from the  decree of  the High Court to this Court,
	  still it  was for  the  respondent  to  make	sure
	  whether an  application for special leave had been
	  filed in  this Court and he could not, by marrying
	  immediately after the High Court's decree, deprive
	  the wife  of the  chance of  presenting a  special
	  leave petition to this Court. If a person does so,
	  he takes  a risk  and could  not ask	the Court to
	  revoke the special leave on that ground."
1105
     We	 must  for  this  reason  overrule  the	 preliminary
objection and direct the special leave petition to be placed
for hearing. There shall be no order as to costs.
N.P.V
1106

