

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Kashmeri Devi vs Delhi Administration & Anr on 25 April, 1988Equivalent citations: 1988 AIR 1323, 1988 SCR  (3) 700
Author: K Singh
Bench: Singh, K.N. (J)
           PETITIONER:
KASHMERI DEVI

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
DELHI ADMINISTRATION & ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT25/04/1988

BENCH:
SINGH, K.N. (J)
BENCH:
SINGH, K.N. (J)
KANIA, M.H.

CITATION:
 1988 AIR 1323		  1988 SCR  (3) 700
 1988 SCC  Supl.  482	  JT 1988 (2)	293
 1988 SCALE  (1)977


ACT:
     Constitution  of	India,	1950:	Article	  136-Police
investigation-Credibility  of-Death   in   police   custody-
Allegations of	murder and  torture against police officers-
Court finding that efforts made to protect and shield guilty
police officers-Trial  court directed  to have	thorough and
proper investigation by C.B.I.
     Criminal Procedure	 Code, 1973: Section 173(8)-Death in
police custody-Allegations  of torture	and  murder  against
police officers-Supreme	 Court finding	that efforts made to
protect and  shield guilty  police officers-Trial magistrate
directed to have proper and thorough investigation by C.B.I.



HEADNOTE:
     The appellant  was the widow of a tonga driver who died
in police  custody. It	is alleged that on the fateful night
of  22/23.8.1986   two	sub-inspectors	accompanied  by	 two
constables visited  the	 house	of  one	 Sudesh	 Kumar,	 and
started beating	 him. On  hearing his  shrieks his  maternal
uncle  Gopi   Ram,  the	 tonga	driver	tried  to  intervene
whereupon the policemen are alleged to have beaten him also.
Both of	 them were  arrested taken  to the  police  station,
stripped of  their clothes  and beaten	with iron  rods. The
tonga  driver  succumbed  to  his  injuries  at	 the  police
station. Thereafter,  a post  mortem was  conducted and	 the
dead body  was cremated	 without  handing  it  over  to	 the
appellant.
     The aforesaid  incident  caused  consternation  in	 the
locality, and  a mob  surrounded the police station to lodge
its protest  against the death of the tonga driver in police
custody.  Undaunted  the  police  registered  a	 case  under
Sections 147-149  and 353/332  I.P.C. against the brother of
the deceased and others as they were members of the mob.
     Sudesh Kumar  filed a  written complaint naming the two
sub-inspectors and  the constables  as responsible  for	 the
death of  his maternal	uncle  which  was  registered  under
Section 302/342	 I.P.C. No  action was however taken against
those officers.	 After some  time the  case was converted to
Section 304 I.P.C. for purpose of investigation.
701
     The appellant  approached the  High  Court	 by  a	writ
petition   under    Article   226   for	  transferring	 the
investigation of the case from the Crime Branch of the State
Police to  the Central Bureau of Investigation. The Division
Bench, however, dismissed the petition.
     Disposing of the Appeal, this Court,
^
     HELD: 1.  The police  have not  acted in  a  forthright
manner in investigating the case registered on the complaint
of Sudesh Kumar. [704C-D]
     2. The  circumstances available  on record	 prima facie
show that  effort has  been made  to protect  and shield the
guilty officers	 of the	 police	 who  are  alleged  to	have
perpetrated the	 barbaric offence  of murdering	 Gopi Ram by
beating and torturing. [704D]
     3. The  appellant had  been crying	 hoarse to  get	 the
investigation done  by an  independent	authority  but	none
responded to her complaint. [704D-E]
     4. The  Additional Sessions Judge while considering the
bail application  of one  of  the  Constables-Jagmal  Singh,
considered the	autopsy report	and observed that the Doctor
had postponed  giving his  opinion regarding  the  cause  of
death although the injuries were antimortem. [704D-E]
     5.	 The   Sessions	 Judge	referring  to  a  number  of
circumstances observed	that the  investigating officer	 had
converted the case from Section 302 IPC to 304 IPC on flimsy
grounds within	hours of  the registration  of the case even
without waiting for the post mortem report and that it was a
prima  facie  case  of	deliberate  murder  of	an  innocent
illiterate poor	 citizen of  Delhi  in	police	custody	 and
investigation was partisan. [704E-F]
     6. In  the interest of justice it is necessary to get a
fresh investigation made through an independent authority so
that the truth may be known. [704H]
     7. The  trial court  before whom  the charge  sheet has
been submitted	shall  exercise	 its  powers  under  Section
173(8)	Cr.   P.C.  to	 direct	 the   Central	 Bureau	  of
Investigation for  proper and  thorough investigation of the
case. On issue of such direction the C.B.I. will investigate
the case  in an	 independent and objective manner and submit
additional charge  sheet if  any  in  accordance  with	law.
[705A-B]
702



JUDGMENT:
     CRIMINAL APPELLATE	 JURISDICTION: Criminal	 Appeal	 No.
280 of 1988.
     From the Judgment and Order dated 26.9.1986 of the High
Court of Delhi in Crl. W.P. No.361 of 1986.
     R.L. Panjwani and R.D. Upadhyay for the Appellant.
     S. Madhu  Sudan Rao, N.L. Kakkar and Miss A. Subhashini
for the Respondents.
     The following Order of the Court was delivered:
			 O R D E R
     Special leave granted.
     This is  an unfortunate  case which  tends to shake the
credibility of police investigation and undermines the faith
of common  man in  Delhi Police which is supposed to protect
life and  liberty of  citizens and  maintain law  and order.
There has  been serious	 allegations of	 murder	 by  torture
against the police and further about the haphazard manner in
which the  investigation against the accused police officers
was investigated with a view to shield the guilty members of
the Delhi Police.
     Kashmeri Devi the appellant is the unfortunate widow of
Gopi Ram  deceased who	was a  tonga driver.  On the fateful
night of  22/23.8.1986 two sub-inspectors accompanied by two
constables visited  the house of Sudesh Kumar of Prem Nagar.
It is  alleged	that  they  started  beating  Sudesh  Kumar.
Hearing his  shrieks his  maternal uncle  Gopi Ram  deceased
came to the spot, he tried to intervene whereupon the police
men are	 alleged to  have giving  him beating also. Gopi Ram
and Sudesh  Kumar both were arrested and taken to the Police
Station Patel  Nagar  where  they  were	 stripped  of  their
clothes and  the police	 men gave  them serious beating with
the help  of iron  rods and  iron rulers. It is alleged that
Gopi Ram  succumbed to	his injuries  at the  police station
sustained at  the  hands  of  Satish  Kumar  and  Rana	sub-
inspectors and	Jagmal Singh  and Romesh constables while in
police custody.	 It is alleged that thereafter a post mortem
was conducted  and the	dead body  of Gopi  Ram was cremated
without handing	 over the  dead body  to the appellant. This
incident  caused   consternation  in  the  locality  and  on
23.8.1986 a mob surrounded the police station to lodge
703
its protest  against the  death of  Gopi Ram deceased at the
police hands,  Undaunted the Patel Nagar police registered a
cause under  Section 147/148/149/353/332 of the Indian Penal
Code  against  Shankar	brother	 of  the  deceased  who	 was
arrested along with others on 23.8.1986 as they were members
of the	mob. Sudesh  Kumar who	had been taken to the police
station along with Gopi Ram filed a written complaint at the
police Station	Patel Nagar on 23.8.1986, making allegations
against the  two sub-inspectors	 and the constables. In that
complaint Sudesh  Kumar alleged	 that as a result of beating
by police officers his maternal uncle became unconscious and
thereafter the	police officers	 kept on  beating him at the
police station	as a  result of	 which he  died. He  further
alleged that  the police officers took the dead body of Gopi
Ram to	the hospital  from there  they brought it to another
hospital, where he was forced to sign blank papers. He named
the police officers who were responsible of the death of his
maternal uncle.	 On that  complaint a  case  was  registered
under Sections	302/342 IPC  against the  police officers of
Patel Nagar  Police Station  but no action was taken against
those officers.	 After	some  time  case  was  converted  to
Section 304  IPC for purpose of investigation. The appellant
Kashmeri Devi  approached the  High Court by means of a writ
petition  under	  Article  226	 of  the   Constitution	 for
transferring the  investigation of  the case  from the Crime
Branch	of   the  Delhi	  Police  to   Central	 Bureau	  of
Investigation. Division	 Bench of  the High  Court dismissed
the writ  petition by  its order dated 26th September, 1986.
Thereupon, the	appellant approached  this Court by means of
special leave petition.
     During the	 pendency of the special leave petition this
court granted  time to	the  respondents  twice	 for  filing
counter-affidavit but  the respondents	failed to file their
counter affidavit.  Ultimately on  11.4.1988 Kanwaljit Deol,
Deputy	Commissioner  of  Police  Head	Quarters  has  filed
counter affidavit  setting out a totally different story. He
has stated that on 23.8.1986 the police received information
that one Gopi of Prem Nagar was brought dead by Sudesh Kumar
from Prem Nagar to Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital, New Delhi. On
receipt of  the	 information  from  the	 Hospital  one	sub-
inspector of  police went  to Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital
and obtained  medical legal  certificate of  the  deceased's
Gopi Ram.  It is  alleged that	on a  personal search of the
deceased's body	 the police  recovered 5  small	 packets  of
smack from  his pocket. In his affidavit an attempt has been
made out  to show  that Gopi  Ram had  died  on	 account  of
alcohol and  marphine and  not on  account of  any  injuries
caused to  him by  the police and in this connection a story
has been  set up that Sudesh Kumar had brought the dead body
to Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital and on receiving
704
information from  the Hospital	the police  made recovery of
smack from  the the  deceased's	 pocket.  The  affidavit  is
completely  silent   about  the	  allegations  made  by	 the
appellant that	the Gopi  Ram and Sudesh Kumar were arrested
taken to  the police  station and  Gopi Ram  was  beaten  to
death. The  affidavit further  refers to some medical report
which purports	to state  that deceased	 died on  account of
alcohol and marphine. It is further stated that after taking
into consideration  the cause  of the  death  given  by	 the
Doctor, charges	 were amended to Sections 323/342/34-IPC and
after completing  the investigation challan was prepared and
the same  has  been  put  in  the  Magistrate's	 Court.	 The
affidavit of  Kanwaljit Deol  states that  in the absence of
evidence the  story set	 up by	Sudesh Kumar  could  not  be
substantiated.
     After hearing  learned counsel  for the  parties and on
perusal of  the record we are satisfied that prima facie the
police	have   not  acted   in	a   forthright	 manner	  in
investigating the  case,  registered  on  the  complaint  of
Sudesh Kumar.  The circumstances  available on	record prima
facie show  that effort	 has been made to protect and shield
the guilty  officers of	 the police  who are alleged to have
perpetrated the	 barbaric offence  of murdering	 Gopi Ram by
beating and  torturing. The appellant has been crying hoarse
to get	the investigation  done by  an independent authority
but none responded to her complaint. The Additional Sessions
Judge while  considering  the  bail  application  of  Jagmal
Singh, Constable, considered the autopsy report and observed
that Doctor  had postponed  giving his opinion regarding the
cause of  death although  the injuries	were antimortem. The
learned	 Sessions   Judge   referring	to   a	 number	  of
circumstances observed	that the  investigating officer	 had
converted the case from 302 IPC to 304 IPC on flimsy grounds
within hours  of the  registration of  the case even without
waiting for  the postmortem  report.  The  learned  Sessions
Judge further  observed that  it was  a prima  facie case of
deliberate murder  of an innocent illiterate poor citizen of
Delhi in police custody and investigation was partisan.
     We are  in full agreement with the observations made by
the learned  Sessions Judge.  As already  noted	 during	 the
pendency of  the writ  petition before	the High  Court	 and
special leave  petition	 before	 this  Court  the  case	 was
further converted  from 304  IPC to  323/34 IPC. Prima facie
the police  has acted  in partisan manner to shield the real
culprits and the investigation of the case has not been done
in a  proper and  objective manner.  We are therefore of the
opinion that  in the  interest of justice it is necessary to
get  a	fresh  investigation  made  through  an	 independent
authority so that truth may be known.
705
     Since according  to the  respondents  charge-sheet	 has
already been submitted to the Magistrate we direct the trial
court before  whom the	charge sheet  has been	submitted to
exercise his  powers under Section 173(8) Cr. P.C. to direct
the Central  Bureau of Investigation for proper and thorough
investigation of  the case.  On issue  of such direction the
Central Bureau of Investigation will investigate the case in
an independent	and objective  manner and  it  will  further
submit additional  charge sheet,  if any, in accordance with
law. The appeal stands disposed of accordingly.
N.V.K.				    Appeal disposed of.
706




