

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Babu Ram & Ors vs Gram Sabha Buhavi & Anr on 6 April, 1988Equivalent citations: 1988 AIR 1085, 1988 SCR  (3) 436
Author: M Rangnath
Bench: Misra Rangnath
           PETITIONER:
BABU RAM & ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
GRAM SABHA BUHAVI & ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT06/04/1988

BENCH:
MISRA RANGNATH
BENCH:
MISRA RANGNATH
DUTT, M.M. (J)

CITATION:
 1988 AIR 1085		  1988 SCR  (3) 436
 1988 SCC  Supl.  485	  JT 1988 (2)	 21
 1988 SCALE  (1)640


ACT:
     Punjab Village Common Lands (Regulation) Act, 1961: ss.
13(a) (i), 13(a) (ii) and 13B-Effect of amendment by Haryana
Act 2  of 1981	omitting s.  13B with  retrospective effect-
Civil Court  barred from  adjudicating upon question whether
any land  or immovable	property is  or is not Shamilat deh-
Shamilat deh  in adverse  possession-Civil Court whether has
jurisdiction to determine ownership.



HEADNOTE:
%
     Section  13B   of	the   Punjab  Village  Common  Lands
(Regulation) Act,  1961 inserted  therein by the Haryana Act
34 of  1974 mandated  transfer of  all suits  pending in any
civil court  against the  panchayat relating to the question
as to  whether the  suit land was excluded from the ambit of
shamilat deh,  to and  institution of  fresh proceedings  in
such   cases   before	the   Assistant	  Collector   having
jurisdiction over the village.
     The suit filed by the appellants for a declaration that
they were  the owners  of  the	land  in  dispute  in  their
possession and that the respondent Gram Sabha had nothing to
do with	 the same, was transferred by the trial court to the
Assistant Collector  under s.  13B of  the Act. The revision
application filed by them was dismissed by the High Court.
     During the	 pendency of  the appeal by special leave in
this Court  the Act  was further  amended by  Act 2  of 1981
deleting s.  13B with retrospective effect from November 12,
1974. Amended  s. 13(a)	 barred jurisdiction of civil courts
to entertain or adjudicate upon the question (i) whether any
land or	 other immovable property is or is not shamilat deh,
and (ii) whether the suit land vests or does not vest in the
Panchayat.
     It was  contended for  the appellants that there was no
dispute as  to	the  question  whether	the  suit  land	 was
shamilat deh  or not.  The only	 question  that	 has  to  be
decided in  the suit was whether the appellants had acquired
title to the suit land by adverse possession, and therefore,
s. 13(a)(i) was not applicable.
437
     Dismissing the appeal,
^
     HELD: The	suit instituted	 by the appellants cannot be
heard and  disposed of	by the	civil court.  The  Assistant
Collector  to	whom  the  suit	 has  been  transferred	 has
jurisdiction to	 dispose of  the same in accordance with the
provisions of the Act as amended. [440AB]
     The  trial	 court	had  transferred  the  suit  to	 the
Assistant  Collector  on  a  finding  that  the	 controversy
between the  parties related  to the  question as to whether
the suit land was excluded from the ambit of shamilat deh as
defined in s. 2(g) of the Act. The said finding has not been
challenged either  before the  High Court  or in the special
leave petition.	 Therefore, the	 civil court  will  have  no
jurisdiction to	 try the  suit instituted  by the appellants
involving the  decision on  the question  as contained in s.
13(a)(i) of the Act. [439F-G]
     Even assuming  that s.  13(a)(i) is  not applicable and
that the  question to  be decided in the suit is whether the
appellants had	acquired title	to the	suit land  which  is
Shamilat deh within the meaning of s. 2(g) of the Act, still
the civil court will have no jurisdiction to try the suit in
view of	 s. 13(a)(ii)  of the Act, for the question would be
whether the  suit land	vests or  does not  vest in the Gram
sabha. [439H, 440A]



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDlCTION: Civil Appeal No. 1951 of
1978.
     From the  Judgment and  order dated  27.4.1977  of	 the
Punjab and  Haryana High  Court in Civil Revision No. 869 of
1975.
     Harbans Lal and S. K. Mehta for the Appellants.
     Ashok Grover for the Respondents.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     DUTT, J. In this appeal by special leave the appellants
have challenged	 the constitutional  validity of section 13B
of the	Punjab Village	Common Lands (Regulation) Act, 1961,
hereinafter referred to as 'the Act'.
 Section  13B  of  the  Act,  as  it  stood	 before	 its
amendment, provides inter alia that all suits pending in any
Civil Court  in respect	 of  any  land	or  other  immovable
property wherein relief has been claimed on
438
the ground  of its  being excluded  from shamilat  deh under
clause (g)  of section	2 or on any of the grounds mentioned
in sub-section	(3) of	section 4  of the  Act	against	 the
Panchayat,  shall   stand  transferred	 to  and  the  fresh
proceedings for	 seeking relief	 on  the  aforesaid  grounds
shall be  instituted before  the Assistant  Collector of the
First Grade having jurisdiction over the village wherein the
land or other immovable property is situate.
     The appellants have filed a suit before the Subordinate
Judge, First Class, Kurukshetra, for a declaration that they
are the	 owners of  the land  in dispute measuring about 124
acres in their respective possession and the respondent Gram
Sabha Buhavi  has nothing  to do  with the same. The learned
Subordinate Judge,  transferred the  suit to  the  Assistant
Collector, First  Grade, Thanesar, under section 13B, upon a
finding that  the controversy between the parties relates to
the question  as to  whether the suit land was excluded from
the ambit of shamilat deh, as defined in section 2(g) of the
Act. The  appellants, being  aggrieved by  the said order of
transfer, filed an application for revision against the same
before the  Punjab &  Haryana High  Court. The High Court by
the impugned  judgment dismissed  the revisional application
and upheld  the	 order	of  the	 learned  Subordinate  Judge
transferring the  suit	to  the	 Assistant  Collector  under
section 13B of the Act. Hence this appeal by special leave.
     It	 is   not  necessary   for  us	 to   consider	 the
constitutional validity of section 13B of the Act, as during
the pendency  of the  appeal in	 this  Court,  the  Act	 was
amended by  the Haryana Act 2 of 1981. Section 5 of Act 2 of
1981  omitted	sections  13A  of  13B	from  the  Act	with
retrospective effect from November 12, 1974, that is to say,
the date  on which  they were  inserted in  the Act  by	 the
Haryana Act  34 of  1974. Section 4 of Act 2 of 1981 amended
section 13  of the  Act. The  amended section 13 provides as
follows:
	  "S. 13.  Bar of  jurisdiction-No Civil Court shall
	  have jurisdiction
	  (a)	to entertain or adjudicate upon any question
	       whether
	       (i)   any land or other immovable property is
		    or is not shamilat deh;
	       (ii) any	 land or other immovable property or
		    any right,	title or  interest  in	such
		    land or other immovable
439
		    property vests or does not vest in under
		    this Act;
	  (b)  in respect  of any  matter which	 any revenue
	       court, officer  or authority  is empowered by
	       or under this Act to determine, or
	  (c)  to question  the legality of any action taken
	       or  matter  decided  by	any  revenue  court,
	       officer or authority empowered to do so under
	       this Act."
     In view  of the  fact that section 13B has been omitted
with   retrospective	effect,	  the	 question   of	 the
constitutional	validity   of  that  section  is  no  longer
relevant. The  only question  that now arises is whether the
Civil Court  has jurisdiction to hear the suit instituted by
the appellants. Section 13(a)(i), as substituted by Act 2 of
1981, takes  away the  jurisdiction of	the Civil  Court  to
entertain or  adjudicate upon  any question whether any land
or immovable property is or is not shamilat deh.
     It is,  however, submitted	 by Mr. Harbans Lal, learned
counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants, that there is
no dispute  as to  the question	 whether the  suit  land  is
shamilat deh or not. The appellants admit that the suit land
is shamilat deh. The only question that has to be decided in
the suit  is whether  the appellants  have acquired title to
the suit  land by  adverse possession.	Accordingly,  it  is
contended that	section 13(a)(i) is not applicable and Civil
Court will  have jurisdiction  to decide the suit instituted
by the appellants.
     It	 has   been  already   noticed	that   the   learned
Subordinate Judge  transferred the  suit  to  the  Assistant
Collector on  a finding	 that the  controversy	between	 the
parties related	 to the question as to whether the suit land
was excluded  from the	ambit of shamilat deh, as defined in
section 2(g)  of the  Act. The	said finding  of the learned
Subordinate Judge  has not been challenged either before the
High Court  or in  the special	leave petition. In our view,
therefore, the	Civil Court will have no jurisdiction to try
the suit instituted by the appellants involving the decision
on the question as contained in section 13(a)(i) of the Act.
     Even assuming  that section  13(a)(i) is not applicable
and that  the question	to be decided in the suit is whether
the appellants have acquired title to the suit land which is
shamilat deh  within the meaning of section 2(g) of the Act,
still the Civil Court will have no jurisdiction
440
to try the suit in view of section 13(a)(ii) of the Act, for
the question  would be	whether the  suit land vests or does
not vest  in the Gram Sabha. In the circumstances, we are of
the view  that the  suit instituted by the appellants cannot
be heard  and disposed	of by the learned Subordinate Judge,
and the	 Assistant Collector  to  whom	the  suit  has	been
transferred   by   the	 learned   Subordinate	 Judge	 has
jurisdiction to	 dispose of  the suit in accordance with the
provisions of the Act as amended.
     For the  reasons aforesaid,  this appeal  is dismissed.
There will,  however, be no order as to costs. The Assistant
Collector  is	directed  to   dispose	of   the   suit	  as
expeditiously as possible.
P.S.S.				      Appeal dismissed.
441




