

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
All India Backward Classes And ... vs Union Of India & Ors on 19 April, 1988Equivalent citations: 1988 AIR 1322, 1988 SCR  (3) 613
Author: K Singh
Bench: Singh, K.N. (J)
           PETITIONER:
ALL INDIA BACKWARD CLASSES AND MINORITIES WELFAREASSOCIATION

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
UNION OF INDIA & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT19/04/1988

BENCH:
SINGH, K.N. (J)
BENCH:
SINGH, K.N. (J)
KANIA, M.H.

CITATION:
 1988 AIR 1322		  1988 SCR  (3) 613
 1988 SCC  Supl.  500	  JT 1988 (2)	166
 1988 SCALE  (1)799


ACT:
     Delhi  Higher   Judicial  Service	 Rules:	  Additional
District Judge-Refusal	of Selection  grade - Justiciability
of.
     Constitution of  India, 1950:  Articles  233  and	235-
Judicial officer  -Promotion to	 higher	 grade/post-Made  on
criteria of  merit-Junior officer  bound  to  supersede	 his
senior-Integrity  of   judicial	 officer   -Great  asset  to
administration of justice-To be given due consideration.



HEADNOTE:
     The 2nd  petitioner,  a  member  of  the  Delhi  Higher
Judicial Service and working as an Additional District Judge
in a  writ petition  to this  Court, contended	that he	 was
directly  recruited   to  service   as	a  Scheduled  Castes
candidate  and	 that  the   High  Court  had  acted  in  an
unreasonable manner  in refusing to grant selection grade to
him on more than one occasion.
     Disposing of the Writ Petition,
^
     HELD: 1.  Where promotion	to higher  grade or  post is
made on	 the criteria of merit, many a time a junior officer
is  bound  to  supersede  his  senior.	In  the	 process  of
assessment of  comparative merit,  supersession of  a senior
officer may result. This cannot be helped.[614G-H]
     In the  instant case,  the petitioner was considered on
merit along  with  others,  and	 as  the  High	Court  found
officers junior to him suitable for grant of selection grade
the petitioner	could not  be selected.	 This Court finds no
illegality in the High Court's order. [615A]
     2. Integrity  of a judicial officer is a great asset to
administration of  justice. It	must be	 given	due  weight.
[615C]
     3. The  petitioner in  the instant	 case, comes  from a
weaker section of the society and he has been found to be an
honest officer.	 This fact  needs  consideration.  The	High
Court should consider the petitioner's
614
case sympathetically for the grant of selection grade at the
next selection. [615D]



JUDGMENT:
     ORIGINAL JURISDICTION: Writ Petition No. 5858 of 1983.
     (Under Article 32 of the Constitution of India)
     G.L. Sanghi,  M.T. Siddiqi	 and  Irfan  Ahmed  for	 the
Petitioners.
     Anil Dev  Singh,  C.  Ramesh,  K.	Swami  and  Miss  A.
Subhashini for the Respondents.
     The following order of the Court was delivered:
			 O R D E R
     The Petitioner  is a  member of  Delhi Higher  Judicial
Service, at  present working  as Additional  district Judge.
The petitioner	was  directly  recruited  to  service  as  a
Scheduled Castes  candidate. He has approached this Court by
means of  this petition under Article 32 of the Constitution
with a	grievance that	the High Court of Delhi has acted in
an unreasonable	 manner in refusing to grant selection grade
to him	on more	 than one occasion. A number of other allied
questions were	raised during  the course  of arguments	 but
ultimately on  behalf of  the petitioner  only the grievance
relating to the refusal of selection grade was pressed.
     Having heard  learned counsel  for	 the  parties  at  a
length and  having perused  the records	 and also the annual
confidential reports  awarded to  the petitioner  and  other
papers produced	 on behalf  of the  High Court,	 we find  it
difficult to hold that the High Court has acted unreasonably
in refusing  to grant  selection grade	to  the	 petitioner.
Admittedly grant  of selection	grade was  considered on the
criteria of  merit to  the members  of Delhi Higher Judicial
Service.  Whenever   a	post  in  the  selection  grade	 was
available the  High Court  considered the  petitioner  along
with other officers but on a comparative assessment of merit
of eligible  officers, it  granted selection  grade  to	 the
officers who  were junior  to the  petitioner  and  in	that
process the  petitioner stood superseded. Where promotion to
higher grade  or post is made on the criteria of merit, many
a time	junior officer	is bound  to supersede his senior in
the process  of assessment  of comparative  merit, which may
result in  supersession of  a senior officer. This cannot be
helped since  the petitioner's	case was considered on merit
along with others. and as
615
the High  Court found  officers	 junior	 to  the  petitioner
suitable for  grant of	selection grade the petitioner could
not be	selected. We  find no illegality in the High Court's
orders.
     However, we  would like to refer one aspect which needs
consideration. On  a perusal  of the  confidential character
roll entries  and other	 papers produced before us on behalf
of the	High Court,  we find  that since  March 1979 to July
1980 the monthly statement of work done by the petitioner as
assessed by the High Court on the basis of the report of the
District Judge	shows that the High Court rated his work and
conduct as  "good" and for the years 1982-83, 1983-84, 1984-
85, 1985-86  and 1986-87 the petitioner has been awarded 'B'
grading. No  doubt he  has not	earned 'A'  grading but	 the
confidential reports  show that	 he is	an  honest  officer.
Integrity  of  a  judicial  officer  is	 a  great  asset  to
administration of  justice, it must be given due weight. The
petitioner comes from a weaker section of the society and he
has been  found to  be an  honest officer,  this fact  needs
consideration. In our opinion the High Court should consider
the petitioner's  case	sympathetically	 for  the  grant  of
selection grade in the light of our observations at the next
selection.
     Writ petition is disposed of accordingly, there will be
no order as to costs.
N.V.K.				  Petition disposed of.
616




