

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Commissioner Of Sales Tax U.P. ... vs S/S Suresh Chand Jain, Tendu ... on 7 April, 1988Equivalent citations: 1988 AIR 1197, 1988 SCR  (3) 446
Author: S Mukharji
Bench: Mukharji, Sabyasachi (J)
           PETITIONER:
COMMISSIONER OF SALES TAX U.P. LUCKNOW, ETC. ETC.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
S/S SURESH CHAND JAIN, TENDU LEAVES DEALER, LALITPUR, ETC.ET

DATE OF JUDGMENT07/04/1988

BENCH:
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)
BENCH:
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)
RANGNATHAN, S.

CITATION:
 1988 AIR 1197		  1988 SCR  (3) 446
 1988 SCC  Supl.  421	  JT 1988 (2)	 81
 1988 SCALE  (1)693


ACT:
     U.P. Sales	 Tax Act,  1948: Section 21-Assesse-Carrying
on business  in Tendu  leave-Case of assessee no inter State
Sales-C	 Existence   of	 T.P.	Form  IV-Whether   evidences
existence of inter state sales.
     Central Sales  Tax Act, 1956: Section 3(a)-Inter states
sales-Conditions to be satisfied-What are-Onus on Department
to disprove dealers claim



HEADNOTE:
%
     The respondent-assessee  carried on  business in  Tendu
leaves. He  contended before  the Assessing  Authority	that
there was  no inter  state sale	 of Tendu  leaves, that	 the
entire sales of Tendu leaves were effected in Uttar Pradesh,
and that  he did  not know if the purchasers had taken these
Tendu leaves  to places	 outside Uttar	Pradesh, and even if
they have so taken the assessee could not be assessed to tax
under the Central Sales Tax Act, as the contract between him
and the	 purchaser  was	 to  purchase  goods  in  U.P.	This
contention was	not accepted  and  the	Assessing  Authority
assessed the respondent.
     The Assistant  Commissioner (Judicial) having dismissed
the appeal against the order of the Assessing Authority, the
respondent went	 in Second Appeal to the Sales Tax Appellate
Tribunal. The Tribunal took notice of T.P. Form IV which was
a  transport   permit  issued	by  the	 Forest	 department,
regarding the  validity of  Nikasi of  Tendu leaves from the
forest, and  came to the conclusion that merely because T.P.
Form had  been issued,	it does	 not follow  that there were
inter state  sales. The	 Tribunal  allowed  the	 appeal	 and
quashed the  order passed by the assessing authority as well
as First Appellate Authority.
     The Revenue  went up in appeal to the High Court, which
held that  the goods  were moved out of U.P. in pursuance of
an agreement  of sale  entered into between the assessee and
their  customers   and	that  the  condition  precedent	 for
imposing sales-tax under the Central Sales Tax
447
Act was not present and dismissed the appeal.
     Dismissing	 the   Special	Leave	Petitions   of	 the
Department, this Court,
^
     HELD: 1.  Sale could  be said  to be  in the  course of
inter-state trade  only if two conditions concur, viz. (1) a
sale of	 goods, and  (2) transport  of those  goods from one
State  to   another.  Unless   both  these   conditions	 are
satisfied,  there   could  be  no  sale	 in  the  course  of
interstate  trade.   There  must   be  evidence	  that	 the
transportation was  occasioned by  the contract,  and  as  a
result goods  moved out	 of the	 bargain between the parties
from one State to another. [448H; 449A]
     Bengal Immunity  Co. v.  State  of	 Bihar,	 6  STC	 446
referred to
     2. The condition precedent for imposing sales-tax under
the Central  Sales Tax	Act, is that the goods must move out
of the	State in  pursuance of	some contract  entered	into
between the seller and the purchaser. [449F-G]
     3. T.P.  Form IV  is a  transport permit  issued by the
Forest	Department.  The  Forest  Department  has  given  in
writing that  this permit  did not  relate to sale but was a
certificate regarding the validity of Nikasi of Tendu Leaves
from the  forest. Merely  because T.P. Form has been issued,
it does	 not  follow  that  there  were	 inter-state  sales.
[448F-G]
     4. The  onus  lies	 on  the  Revenue  to  disprove	 the
contention of  the assessee, that a sale is a local sale and
to show that it is an inter-state sale. [449C]



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Special  Leave  Petition
(Civil) Nos. 15054-57 of 1985.
     From the  Judgment and  Order dated  30.1.1985  of	 the
Allahabad High Court in Sales Tax Revision No. 334, 418, 285
and 332 of 1984.
     S.C. Manchanda,  R.S. Rana	 and Ashok K. Srivastava for
the Petitioner.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     SABYASACHI MUKHARJI,  J. This  is	an  application	 for
leave to
448
appeal under  Article 136  of the  Constitution against	 the
Judgment and  order of	the High  Court of  Allahabad, dated
30th January,  1985. The  respondent carried on the business
at the relevant time in Tendu leaves.
     The respondent's case was that there was no inter-state
sales of Tendu leaves in question. On the contrary, its case
was that  the entire  sales of Tendu leaves were effected in
Uttar Pradesh.	This contention	 was  not  accepted  by	 the
assessing authority.  Having failed in the first appeal, the
assessee went  up in  second appeal and the Tribunal allowed
the appeal  and quashed	 the orders  passed by the assessing
authority as  well as the Assistant Commissioner (Judicial).
The Tribunal  exhaustively discussed  the facts.  They found
that the  assessee carried  on business	 in Tendu leaves and
for the	 year 1976-77  the assessee  had been assessed under
Section 21 of the U.P. Sales Tax Act on inter-state sales of
Rs.21,050 to  a tax  of Rs.2,105  whereas the  case  of	 the
assessee was  that the	inter-state sales  were nil.  It was
contended on  behalf of	 the assessee  that the assessee had
effected the sales in U.P. According to the assessee, out of
the above  sales of Rs.21,050, Tendu leaves worth Rs. 10,000
were sold  on 24th  April, 1976	 to Sri	 Gulam	Mohammad  of
Kanpur and  those worth	 Rs.11,050  were  sold	in  cash  at
Lalitpur on 5th May, 1976.
     It was further contended that the assessee did not know
if the	purchasers had	taken these  Tendu leaves  to places
outside U.P.  and even	if they	 had so	 taken, the assessee
could not be assessed to tax under the Central Sales Tax Act
as the	contract  between  him	and  the  purchaser  was  to
purchase goods in U.P. The Tribunal took notice of T.P. Form
IV  which  is  a  transport  permit  issued  by	 the  Forest
Department. The	 Forest Department had given in writing that
this transport	permit did  not relate	to sale but it was a
certificate regarding the validity of Nikasi of Tendu leaves
from the  forest. It  is well-settled  that even  if  it  is
established that the assessee had obtained T.P. Form IV that
by itself  will not  show that the assessee had entered into
inter-state sales. Merely because T.P. Form had been issued,
it does not follow that there were inter-state sales.
     The principles  of inter-state sales were well-settled.
In Bengal  Immunity Co.	 v. State  of  Bihar,  (6  STC	446)
Justice Venkatarama  Ayyar had	held that sale could be said
to be  in the  course  of  inter-state	trade  only  if	 two
conditions concur,  namely, (1)	 a sale	 of goods  and (2) a
transport of  those goods  from one State to another. Unless
both these conditions were satisfied. there could be no sale
in the course of
449
inter-state trade.  There  must	 be  an	 evidence  that	 the
transportation was  occasioned by  the	contract  and  as  a
result goods  moved out	 of the	 bargain between the parties
from one State to another.
     It is  apparent from  the facts  found by	the Tribunal
that  the   assessee  had  since  the  very  beginning	been
contending that	 he had	 effected only	local sales.  He had
also filed an affidavit stating that he had not effected any
sales of Tendu leaves during the course of inter-state trade
and commerce  and that	the had	 never applied to the Forest
Department for	issue of  Form T.P. IV and that no such Form
was ever  issued to him and the Tendu leaves in dispute were
not booked  by him  through railways  or trucks	 for  places
outside U.P.  The Tribunal  found nothing  to discredit this
version of  the assessee.  The onus  lies on  the Revenue to
disprove the  contention of the assessee. The Tribunal found
no material  to do  so. On these facts the Tribunal rejected
the contention of the assessee.
     On these  contentions the	Revenue went  up  in  appeal
before the  High Court.	 The question  posed before the High
Court was as follows:
	  "Whether on  the facts and under the circumstances
	  of the  case the  Tribunal Sales  Tax, Kanpur, was
	  legally justified  in knocking off the tax imposed
	  by the assessing authority?"
     The High Court addressed itself to the question whether
the sales effected by the respondent, were inter-state sales
or not.	 On an analysis of the findings of the Tribunal, the
High Court  found that	the goods were not moved out of U.P.
in pursuance  of an  agreement for sale entered into between
the assessees  and their  customers. The  existence of	T.P.
Form IV	 was taken  note of  but that  did not	conclude the
matter. The condition precedent for imposing sales-tax under
the Central  Sales Tax	Act, is that the goods must move out
of the	State in  pursuance of	some contract  entered	into
between the  seller and	 the purchaser. If that is a correct
principle  in	law,  the   Tribunal  applied  this  correct
principle of  law to  the facts	 of this  case	taking	into
cognizance the existence of T.P. Form.
     In view of the facts of this case, the High Court found
no  material   to   interfere	and   dismissed	  assessee's
contention. We	are of	the opinion  that the High Court was
right. In  the premises this application for leave must fail
and is accordingly dismissed.
N.V.K.					 Petition dismissed.
450




