

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
B.B.Rajwanshi vs State Of U.P. & Ors on 8 April, 1988Equivalent citations: 1988 AIR 1089, 1988 SCR  (3) 469
Author: E Venkataramiah
Bench: Venkataramiah, E.S. (J)
           PETITIONER:
B.B.RAJWANSHI

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF U.P. & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT08/04/1988

BENCH:
VENKATARAMIAH, E.S. (J)
BENCH:
VENKATARAMIAH, E.S. (J)
OJHA, N.D. (J)

CITATION:
 1988 AIR 1089		  1988 SCR  (3) 469
 1988 SCC  (2) 415	  JT 1988 (2)	 46
 1988 SCALE  (1)663


ACT:
     U.P.   Industrial	  Disputes   Act,   1947-Challenging
Constitutional validity	 of sub-section (4) of section 6 of-
Also validity  of  Order  of  Government  of  Uttar  Pradesh
remitting award passed by Labour Court for reconsideration.

HEADNOTE:
%
     In	 this	appeal,	  the	appellant   questioned	 the
constitutional validity	 of sub-section	 (4) of section 6 of
the U.P.  Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 ('The Act') and also
the validity  of the order passed by the Govt. remitting the
award passed by the Labour Court for reconsideration by it.
     The appellant was an employee of respondent No. 5. M/s.
Electric (India) Ltd., Meerut. The services of the appellant
were terminated	 by the	 Management of	the said respondent.
The termination	 of services  led to  an industrial dispute.
The State  Government of  Uttar Pradesh under section 4-K of
the Act	 referred the  said dispute  for adjudication of the
Labour Court,  Meerut. The  Labour Court passed an award and
forwarded it  to the State Government. Instead of publishing
the award  in the  Official Gazette,  as  required  by	sub-
Section (3)  of section	 6 of  the Act, the State Government
passed an order under section 6(4) of the Act, remitting the
award for  reconsideration. The	 appellant submitted  before
the Labour  Court that	he did not want any re-consideration
of  the	  award.  On   7.2.1985,  the  Management  filed  an
application saying  that the case might be fixed for hearing
after two months. The appellant opposed the application. The
case was  adjourned to	11.3.85 and on 11.3.85 to 26.3.85 at
the further request of the management. In the meanwhile, the
management moved  the State  Government to transfer the case
from the  Labour Court,	 Meerut, to  another Labour Court or
the Industrial	Tribunal. The  State  Government  passed  an
order transferring  the	 case  to  the	Industrial  Tribunal
Meerut. Aggrieved  by the  order, remitting the award to the
Labour Court and the subsequent order, transferring the case
to the	Industrial Tribunal,  the  appellant  filed  a	writ
petition in  the High  Court, challenging the above said two
orders. The  High  Court  dismissed  the  writ	petition  in
respect of the order made under section 6(4) of the Act, but
set aside  the order  of transfer. Aggrieved by the judgment
of the High Court, upholding the
470
order passed  under section  6(4) of  the Act, the appellant
filed this appeal in this Court for relief by special leave.
     Allowing the appeal, the Court,
^
     HELD: By  leave of	 the Court,  the appellant raised an
additional  ground   before  the   Court,  questioning	 the
constitutional validity	 of sub-section	 (4) of section 6 of
the  Act   itself,  and	  the  Court   first  took   up	 for
consideration the  question relating  to the  constitutional
validity of  sub-section  (4)  of  section  6  of  the	Act.
[476B-C]
     The questions  raised before the Labour Court were very
simple ones.  They had	no effect  on the  national economy.
They did  not in  any way  interfere with  the principles of
social justice.	 No grave  consequences would have ensued if
the award had been published in the Official Gazette and the
parties, allowed  to question  its validity  before the High
Court under  Article 226  of the  Constitution of  India  or
before	the   Supreme  Court   under  Article	136  of	 the
Constitution. The  parties had	not been given notice by the
State Government  to show  cause why the award should not be
remitted to  the Labour Court for a fresh consideration. The
order of  the State Government also did not state why and on
what points  the State Government was not satisfied with the
award and  the questions  on  which  the  Labour  Court	 was
required to reconsider its award. [479G-H; 480A-B]
     When once	a decision  is	given  by  a  quasi-judicial
authority, it  would not  be safe to confer on any executive
authority the power of review or remission in respect of the
said  decision	 without  imposing  any	 limitation  on	 the
exercise of  such power,  Even when a Court is conferred the
power of  review, such	power can  be  exercised  ordinarily
under the well-known limitations as are found in Order 17 of
the Code  of Civil Procedure. Similarly, under section 16 of
the Arbitration	 Act, 1940,  the power	to remit an award to
the Arbitrator	can be exercised by a Civil Court only under
the circumstances  specified in that connection. Sub-section
(4) of	section 6  of the  act imposes	no such limitations.
[482C-D]
     The argument  of the  State Government that it was open
to the	State Government to seek necessary guidance from the
object	and   contents	of  the	 Act,  and  that  the  State
Government could  remit the  award to  the Labour Court only
for a  reason which  was germane to the statute in question,
was not	 of any	 assistance to	the State Government in this
case because  even though the reason for remitting the award
may be a
471
reason connected  with industry	 or labour,  it can still be
used arbitrarily  to favour  one party	or  the	 other.	 The
ground for  remitting the  award should be one corresponding
to a  ground mentioned in section 16 of the Arbitration Act,
1940; otherwise	 the power  is capable	of serious mischief.
The  facts   in	 this	case  themselves  serve	 as  a	good
illustration of	 the above  proposition. There were only two
main issues  for consideration	before the Labour Court: (1)
whether the  appellant was  a workman,	and (2)	 whether his
services had  been validly  terminated. The Labour Court had
recorded its  findings on  both the  issues in favour of the
appellant. From	 the prayers  made before  the Labour  Court
after the  case had been remitted to it, it is seen that the
Management wanted  to adduce  additional evidence before the
Labour Court  in support of its case. It was not the case of
the  Management	 that  the  Labour  Court  had	unreasonably
refused permission  to the  Management	to  adduce  all	 its
evidence before the award was passed. It was not even a case
where industrial  peace was  likely to	be disturbed  if the
award had  been implemented  as it  was. The award would not
have also  affected prejudicially either national economy or
social justice.	 In the	 above circumstances,  it would	 not
certainly be  proper for  the State  Government to  make  an
order remitting the award. The State Government in this case
could do so because it had been entrusted with such unguided
power under section 6(4) of the Act. [482E-H; 483A-C]
     It was  urged by  counsel for the State Government that
sub-section 4  of section  6 of	 the Act  needed not  to  be
struck down  but the  Court  might  direct  that  the  State
Government should  give a  hearing to  the parties before an
order was  passed under	 section 6(4),	remitting the award,
and also  require the  State Government	 to give  reasons in
support of  its order. The Court did not think that this was
an appropriate	case where  the impugned  provision could be
upheld by  reading into it the requirement of issuing notice
to the parties and the requirement of giving reasons for its
orders. The provisions could not be upheld in the absence of
necessary statutory guidelines for the exercise of the power
conferred  by  it,  having  regard  to	the  fact  that	 the
proceeding  before   the  Labour  Court	 or  the  Industrial
Tribunal is  in the nature of quasijudicial proceeding where
parties have  adequate opportunity to state their respective
cases, to  lead evidence  and make all their submissions. It
is significant	that the corresponding Act which is in force
in the	other parts  of India,	i.e., the Industrial Dispute
Act, 1947  (Central) Act  XIV of  1947) does not contain any
provision corresponding	 to section 6(4) of the Act, and the
absence of  such a  provision in the Central Act has not led
to any serious inconvenience to the general public. [483D-F]
472
     The Management  could not	derive much  assistance from
the decision  of this  Court in	 the Sirsilk  Ltd. &  Ors v.
Government of  Andhra Pradesh  & Anr.[1964]  2 SCR 448 as in
this case  there was  no settlement  arrived at	 between the
appellant and  the Management, which made the publication of
the award unnecessary. [484H; 485F]
     There was	one other  good reason	for taking  the view
that without  any guidelines  it will  not be appropriate to
confer power  on the  State Government	to nullify virtually
the effect of an award by exercising its power under section
6(4) of	 the Act.  The Act  applies not	 merely to  disputes
arising between private management and labour unions and the
workmen employed by them but also to industries owned by the
State Government  and their  workmen. In the cases where the
Government is  the  owner  of  the  industry,  it  would  be
inappropriate to  confer uncontrolled  and unguided power on
the State Government itself to remit the award passed on the
industrial disputes  arising in such industries for there is
every chance  of the  power being  exercised arbitrarily  in
such  cases.   The  danger   of	 entrusting   unguided	 and
uncontrolled power  to remit an award for reconsideration of
the Labour  Court or  Industrial Tribunal  can very  well be
perceived, particularly where the award has gone against the
State Government  in a	dispute arising	 out of	 an industry
owned by  it. The  sub-section (4)  of section 6 of the Act,
which is so widely worded is, therefore, likely to result in
grave injustice	 to a party in whose favour an award is made
as the said provisions can be used to reopen the whole case.
The Court  did not agree with the view expressed by the High
Court of  Allahabad in	V.E. Thamas & Ors. v. State of Uttar
Pradesh &  Ors., [1978] Allahabad Law Journal 1118, in which
the validity  of sub-section (4) of section 6 of the Act had
been upheld. [485F-H; 486G-H; 487C-D]
     Taking into  consideration all the aspects of the case,
including the  object with  which the  Act was	enacted, the
Court felt  that sub-section (4) of section 6 of the Act was
violative of  Article 14  of the Constitution of India as it
conferred unguided  and uncontrolled  powers  on  the  State
Government. The	 Court declared sub-section (4) of section 6
of the	Act as	unconstitutional  and  struck  it  down.  It
followed that  the order  passed by  the  State	 Government,
remitting the  case for	 reconsideration by the Labour Court
was also  liable to  be set  aside. The State Government was
directed to publish the award under section 6(3) of the Act.
On publication	of the	award, it  was open  to any  of	 the
parties aggrieved by the award to resort to such remedies as
might be available to it in law. [487H; 488A-C]
473
     Messrs. Dwarka  Prasad Laxmi  Narain v.  The  State  of
Uttar Pradesh  and two	others, [1954]	S.C.R. 803; State of
Bihar v.  D.N. Ganguly & Ors., [1959] SCR 1191; Sirsilk Ltd.
JUDGMENT:
448; P.	 Sambamurthy &	Ors. v.	 State of  Andhra Pradesh  &
Anr., [1987] 1 S.C.C. 362 and Star Paper Mills Mazdoor Sangh
& Ors.	v. Star	 Paper Mills Ltd., Saharanpur & Ors., [1974]
Allahabad Law Journal 71, referred to.
     V.E. Thamas  & Ors. v. State of Uttar Pradesh and Ors.,
[1978] Allahabad Law Journal 1118, disapproved.

&
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Civil  Appeal No. 864 of
1987.
     From the  Judgment and  Order dated  23.5.1986  of	 the
Allahabad High Court in C.M.W.P. No. 13975 of 1985.
     M.K. Ramamurthi and A.K. Sangal for the Appellant.
     Anil Dev  Singh, G.B.  Pai, O.P.  Sharma,	Mrs.  Shobha
Dikshit, R.C.  Gubrela, K.R.  Gupta and	 R.K. Sharma for the
Respondents.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     VENKATARAMIAH, J.	The appellant has questioned in this
appeal by  special leave the constitutional validity of sub-
section (4)  of section	 6 of  the U.P. Industrial Disputes,
Act, 1947  (hereinafter referred  to as	 'the Act') and also
the validity  of the  Order dated December 5, 1984 passed by
the Government of Uttar Pradesh remitting an award passed by
the Labour Court, Meerut for reconsideration by it.
     The appellant  was an  employee of the Management, M/s.
Electra (India)	 Ltd., Meerut-Respondent  No. 5 in the above
appeal. The services of the appellant were terminated by the
Management by  its Order  dated April  4, 1977	and the said
termination  led   to  an   industrial	dispute.  The  State
Government by its Order dated May 5, 1979 made under section
4-K of the Act referred the said dispute for adjudication to
the Labour Court, Meerut. The question which was referred to
the Labour Court read as follows:
	       "Whether the termination/removal from work of
	  the employee	Shri B.P. Rajwanshi by the employers
	  by their  Order dated 4.4.1977 is justified and/or
	  legal? If not, to
474
	  what benefits/damages	 is the	 concerned  employee
	  entitled to and with what other details?"
     On the basis of the pleadings filed by the parties, the
following issues were framed by the Labour Court:
	  1. Was  Shri	B.B.  Rajwanshi	 not  a	 workman  as
     defined in	 the U.P. Industrial Disputes Act? If so has
     this court jurisdiction to try this case?
	  2. Did  Shri B.B.  Rajwanshi not  make efforts  to
     minimise the losses due to unemployment?
	  3. To	 what relief, if any, is Shri B.B. Rajwanshi
     entitled?
	  4. Has Shri B.B. Rajwanshi been retrenched? If so,
     how does it affect the case?
     After recording the evidence adduced by the parties and
hearing the  arguments the  Labour Court  held, (i) that the
appellant was a workman as defined in the Act, (ii) that the
termination of the services of the appellant was illegal and
(iii) that  the appellant  was entitled	 to be reinstated in
his post  with continuity of service and also to the payment
of  backwages	and  other   benefits.	The   Labour   Court
accordingly passed  an award on August 2, 1984 and forwarded
it to  the State Government. Instead of publishing the award
in the	Official Gazette,  as required by sub-section (3) of
section 6  of the  Act, the State Government passed an Order
dated December	5, 1984	 under section 6(4) of the Act which
read as follows:
		"GOVERNMENT OF UTTAR PRADESH




