

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Mridula Avasthi & Ors. Etc vs University Of Delhi & Ors on 27 April, 1988Equivalent citations: 1988 SCR  (3) 762, 1988 SCC  (2) 572
Author: M Rangnath
Bench: Misra Rangnath
           PETITIONER:
MRIDULA AVASTHI & ORS. ETC.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
UNIVERSITY OF DELHI & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT27/04/1988

BENCH:
MISRA RANGNATH
BENCH:
MISRA RANGNATH
DUTT, M.M. (J)

CITATION:
 1988 SCR  (3) 762	  1988 SCC  (2) 572
 JT 1988 (2)   220	  1988 SCALE  (1)813


ACT:
     Professional  Colleges-Medical  Colleges-Post  Graduate
Medical courses Admission to-Delhi University adopting three
year P.G. degree and two year diploma courses from 1988-As a
transitory  measure   old  system  continued  for  the	1988
academic session  only-Candidates with one year housemanship
made ineligible-Common	selection list	for both seniors and
freshers-Validity of-Directions issued.



HEADNOTE:
     Pursuant to  the directions of the Supreme Court in Dr.
Dinesh	Kumar	&  Ors	v.  Motilal  Nehru  Medical  College
Allahabad, &  Ors. [1987]  4 SCC 459 regarding uniformity in
post-graduate  medical	 education,  respondent	  No.  1-the
University of Delhi, decided to adopt the three years course
for the	 post-graduate degree and a two years course for the
diploma commencing from the academic session of 1988.
     However,  with   a	 view	to  mitigating	hardship  to
candidates/students who	 had already completed the house job
and had	 become entitled to undergo the post-graduate course
in two	years, as  a transitory	 provision, the	 respondent-
University decided to continue the practice prevailing prior
to 1988	 for a	year. It  evolved a  scheme whereunder,	 the
number of  seats for  the post-graduate	 course and  diploma
course available  in the previous year for a student who had
completed one  year's housemanship were left untouched. As a
transitional provision,	 the University	 agreed to  fix	 75%
quota, for  the 1988  session only.  As per  a Note  in	 the
scheme, candidates  who had  done house job/Junior Residency
for period  of one year were not eligible for admission to 3
years post-graduate degree and 2 years post-graduate diploma
course.
     The  prospectus,	however,   prescribed	one   common
selection test for both the categories.
     A set  of writ  petitions were  filed before  the	High
Court challenging the scheme of the University mainly on the
basis that  when there	was one selection test, merit should
prevail and  classification in	the manner  indicated by the
scheme was bad. The High Court made an interim
763
order  requiring   the	University  to	have  the  selection
completed on  the basis	 of merit  adjudged  in	 the  common
selection test.
     Disposing	of   the  Writ	 Petitions  and	 some  cases
transferred from the High Court,
^
     HELD: The	seniors who  have already  done	 one  year's
housemanship and  freshers  belong  to	two  categories	 and
cannot be  said	 to  be	 equal.	 The  question	of  test  of
comparative merit  would not  have arisen  if the University
had not	 prescribed a  common selection	 test for  these two
categories. If	the merit  list of  the	 selection  test  is
followed, more	seniors are  entitled to  admission and	 the
scheme of reservation would not work. [765F-G]
     While selection  in the  higher course should be on the
basis of  merit in  the peculiar  facts and circumstances of
this case,  purely confined  to a  transitory  measure,	 the
situation has to be handled not by first principles but by a
somewhat informed  pragmatic adhocism especially because the
situation would not reoccur. [766D]
     The impasse  created on  account  of  rival  claims  by
freshers and seniors has to have a rough and ready solution-
yet not	 arbitrary  and	 as  acceptable	 and  satisfying  as
possible. [766F]
     With a  view to  providing some more seats for seniors,
the respondent	University should  create one  seat in every
speciality. Thus, 21 additional seats will be available over
and above  the seats  fixed by	the University	representing
75%. From  the reserved	 seats made  for  the  freshers,  21
seats, being one from every speciality, should be taken away
and made  available to	the seniors.  Thus, 42	seats in all
will be	 available for	the  seniors  in  the  Post-Graduate
course to  be filled  up on  the basis	of inter  se  merit,
keeping the senior group apart. [766G-H; 767A-B]
     The  Central   Government	should	make  the  necessary
provisions for funds. The Indian Medical Council may provide
the necessary  accommodation by	 relaxing the  requirements.
[767D]
     Dr. Dinesh	 Kumar v. Motilal Nehru College, Allahabad &
Ors., [1987] 4 SCC 459, referred to.



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL ORIGINAL  JURISDICTION: Writ Petition (Civil) NO.
194 of 1988. etc etc.
764
     (Under Article 32 of the Constitution of India).
     D.D. Thakur, T.S. Krishnamurthi Iyer, Rajesh Mitra, Ms.
Santosh Kalra,	H.K. Puri, R.L. Roshan, S.S. Sabharwal, S.K.
Sabharwal, and M.K.D. Namboodiri for the Petitioners.
     P.P. Rao,	S.N. Kacker,  G. Rath,	Mrs. A.	 Mathur,  A.
Mariarputham, C.M.  Nayyar, D.S.  Narula,  Kailash  Vasudev,
Mrs. Uma Jain and P.K. Mehta for the Respondents.
     The following Order of the Court was delivered:
			 O R D E R
     The  writ	 application  under   Article  32   and	 the
transferred writ  petitions from the Delhi High Court relate
to selection  of  medical  graduates  for  undertaking	post
graduate study for the year 1988 under the Delhi University.
In Dr.	Dinesh Kumar  v. Motilal  Nehru College, Allahabad &
Ors.,  this   Court  emphasised	 the  desirability  of	post
graduate education in the Medical Faculty as far as possible
to have	 uniformity throughout	the country.  It, therefore,
commended to the educational institutions which followed the
system of  one year  house job	followed by two years' post-
graduate course	 to switch  over to  the pattern  of a three
year post-graduate  course with house job in the first year.
On September  25, 1987,	 in the	 very same  matter, when the
Court made  an order  reported in  1987 4  SCC 459,  it	 was
pointed out  that in some States the post graduate course is
for a  term of two years with one year housemanship while in
the other  States it  is a  full term  of three	 years. This
Court, therefore,  directed with  a view  to bringing  about
uniformity on  the basis  of the  principle accepted  in the
earlier decision  that for  admission beginning	 from  1993,
there would  be only  one  pattern,  namely,  a	 three	year
integrated course  without any	separate  housemanship.	 The
University of  Delhi decided  to adopt the three year course
for the	 post-graduate degree  and a two year course for the
diploma commencing from the academic Session of 1988. With a
view to	 mitigating hardship  to candidates/students who had
already completed  the house  job and had become entitled to
undergo	 the   postgraduate  course   in  two  years,  as  a
transitory provision, the University decided to continue the
practice prevailing prior to 1988 for a year. The University
evolved a  scheme where	 under the  number of  seats for the
post-graduate course  and diploma  course available  in	 the
previous year  for a  student who  had completed  one year's
housemanship were  left untouched.  The number of such seats
are 198 for the degree course
765
and 111	 for the  diploma course.  Out of  these  25%  being
placed at  the disposal	 of the	 Government of	India to  be
filled-up on  all India	 selection basis,  the exact  number
available to  be filled-up  by the  University worked out to
149  and   84  respectively.  As  a  transitional  provision
intended for  the 1988 Session only the University agreed to
fix 75%	 quota (representing  139 seats	 in  the  three-year
degree course  and 66 seats in the two-year diploma course).
The following was specified a part of the Scheme:
	  "Important Note
	       Candidates who  have  done  house  job/junior
	  Residency  for  a  period  of	 one  year  are	 not
	  eligible for	admission to  3 years  Post-Graduate
	  Degree and 2 years PostGraduate Diploma Course."
The prospectus,	 however, prescribed  one  common  selection
test.
     A set  of writ  petitions were  filed before  the Delhi
High Court  challenging the  scheme of the University mainly
on the	basis that  when there was one selection test, merit
should prevail and classification in the manner indicated by
the scheme  was bad.  Reliance was  placed before  the	High
Court on  observations of  this Court that for post graduate
degree the  test of  excellence should prevail and the level
of high	 proficiency should  be maintained.  The High  Court
made an	 interim order	requiring the University to have the
selection completed  on the  basis of  merit adjudged in the
common selection test.
     This is  a dispute	 essentially between  the University
and the	 freshers who have not done housemanship on one side
and the	 seniors who have already completed housemanship for
one year  on the  other. There	can be	no dispute  that the
seniors and  the freshers  belong to two separate categories
and cannot  be said  to be equals. If the University had not
prescribed a common selection test for these two categories,
the question  of test  of comparative  merit would  not have
arisen. If  that had  not been	done perhaps  the High Court
would not  have made  its direction and the difficulty which
has arisen would not have cropped up.
     The classification	 of  freshers  and  those  who	have
completed a  year's housemanship,  though a perceptible one,
loses its  importance in  view of  the traditional situation
that in the system prevailing prior to
766
1987,  both   the  groups  were	 treated  as  qualified	 for
appearing at  the selection test for post graduate study. We
are told by learned members at the Bar that after transitory
Note extracted	above disappears in the coming year, the old
practice  shall	  again	 revive.   This	 is  an	 unfortunate
situation. There  being no  limit to  participation  in	 the
selection test for post-graduate study candidates who become
unsuccessful year  after year,	in the absence of any limit,
keep on	 taking chances.  This certainly  is not a desirable
feature	 and  should  be  looked  into	by  the	 appropriate
authorities quickly.
     If the  merit list	 of  the  selection  examination  is
followed, more	of seniors are entitled to admission and the
scheme of  reservation would  not work.	 As we	have already
pointed out  in the  name of  what counsel calls convenience
(and how  inconvenient it  was	is  not	 known),  the  Delhi
University made	 an  initial  mistake  of  having  a  common
selection test	for two	 categories of	candidates. While we
reiterate the  view expressed by this Court on more than one
occasion that  selection in  the higher courses should be on
the basis  of merit, in the peculiar facts and circumstances
arising	 in  this  case	 purely	 confined  to  a  transitory
measure, the  situation has  to	 be  handled  not  by  first
principles but	by a  somewhat informed	 pragmatic adhocism.
This has  to be	 so because the situation would not reoccur.
Again the  initial  mistake  of	 the  Delhi  University	 had
brought some  amount of	 confusion and	it  has	 mounted  up
following the  intervention by	the  High  Court.  The	time
available is too short as under the Scheme intended to apply
to the	whole country  the course has to begin on the 2nd of
May, 1988.
     In this  background we are of the view that the impasse
created on  account of	the rival  claims  advanced  by	 the
freshers and  the seniors  has to  have a  rough  and  ready
solution-yet not  arbitrary and as acceptable and satisfying
as  possible.  We  find	 that  the  two-year  degree  course
speciality-wise has  149 seats	while the  three-year degree
course	has  139  seats.  For  convenience  we	extract	 the
particulars made  available at	page 4	of the	Bulletine of
Information. It	 may be	 pointed out  that  there  are	1003
candidates  as	against	 total	270  vacancies	(degree	 and
diploma courses together) for the seniors; and there are 331
candidates as  against 205 vacancies for the two courses for
the freshers.  With a  view to providing some more seats for
seniors we suggested to Mr. Rao appearing for the University
that the  number of  seats may	be increased  and he  has on
instructions agreed,  provided the  Union of  India provides
funds and  the Medical	Council agrees to accommodate. There
are 21	specialities as	 indicated above. We direct that the
University shall  create one  seat in  every speciality	 and
thus 21 additional seats will
767
be available  over and	above the  149 seats  fixed  by	 the
University representing	 the 75%  quota.  To  this  enhanced
number of  seats the  25% reservation of All India Selection
shall not  apply. From	the  reserved  seats  made  for	 the
freshers, 21  seats being one from every speciality shall be
taken away  and made available to the seniors. Thus 42 seats
in all	will be	 available for	the  seniors  in  the  Post-
Graduate course	 to be	filled up  on the  basis of inter se
merit keeping the senior group apart.
     The creation  of the  21 seats  will involve additional
funds to  be provided  by the  Union of	 India. It will also
require approval  of the  Medical Council of India and there
will perhaps  also be necessity for permitting the variation
of guide-student  ratio. Since	it is for one year and there
would be  no scope  for recurrence  and this  has arisen  in
peculiar  circumstances	  explained  above,  we	 direct	 the
Government of  India to	 take our order made without hearing
it with	 a sense  of understanding  and make  the  necessary
provisions. We also suggest to the Indian Medical Council to
provide	 the   necessary  accommodation	  by  relaxing	 the
requirements. These  may be  done quickly  so that  the time
schedule may not be affected.
N.P.V.				 Petitions disposed of.
768




