

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Dhirendra Kumar Garg And Ors vs Smt. Sugandhi Bai Jain & Ors on 23 September, 1988Equivalent citations: 1989 AIR  147, 1988 SCR  Supl. (3) 196
Author: L Sharma
Bench: Sharma, L.M. (J)
           PETITIONER:
DHIRENDRA KUMAR GARG AND ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
SMT. SUGANDHI BAI JAIN & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT23/09/1988

BENCH:
SHARMA, L.M. (J)
BENCH:
SHARMA, L.M. (J)
PATHAK, R.S. (CJ)
KANIA, M.H.

CITATION:
 1989 AIR  147		  1988 SCR  Supl. (3) 196
 1989 SCC  (1)	85	  JT 1988 (3)	778
 1988 SCALE  (2)1539


ACT:
    Code of Civil Procedure, 1908: 0.32. Rule  7--Compromise
decree--Minor represented by guardian--Application for leave
Court to see that compromise was not one sided.



HEADNOTE:
    The	 husband of respondent No. l sought eviction of	 the
appellants-tenants. The suit was decreed in his favour along
with  money decree for arrears of rent and  damages.  During
the pendency of the appeal the plaintiff died and his  legal
representatives were substituted as respondents. Some of his
children  who were minor were placed under the	guardianship
of respondent No. 1. Consequent to a petition by the parties
a  compromise  decree was passed setting  aside	 the  entire
decree. The respondents thereafter challenged the compromise
decree.	 The trial court dismissed the suit. On	 appeal	 the
first appellate court reversed the decision. The High  Court
dismissed the appeal, preferred by the appellants.
    In this appeal by special leave it was contended for the
appellants  that as a consideration for the compromise	they
were  giving up their right to claim costs which might	have
been decreed by the appellate court in case of their success
on  merits. The respondents' case was that the	guardian  of
the  minors was guilty of gross negligence in entering	into
the  compromise	 by failing to take into  consideration	 the
interest of the minors.
    Dismissing the appeal,
    HELD: The decision of the courts below does not call for
any  interference.  The compromise decree is fit to  be	 set
aside on the ground of gross negligence. [199F; 199Cl
    The	 compromise  was one sided whereby the	minors	were
giving up their right under the trial court's decree both in
respect of eviction as well as arrears of rent and  damages.
In view of the provisions of Order XXXII, Rule 7 of the Code
of  Civil Procedure it was essential for the Court  to	have
						  PG NO 196
						  PG NO 197
granted	 permission  to	 the  guardian	to  enter  into	 the
compromise   only   after  considering	all   the   relevant
circumstances. [198F; 198C-D]
    The earlier civil appeal is restored to its file  before
the  Additional	 District Judge for disposal  in  accordance
with law. [l99G]



JUDGMENT:
    CIVIL  APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No.  350  of
1977.
    From  the  Judgment and Order dated	 19.10.1976  of	 the
Madhya Pradesh High Court in Second Appeal No. 385 of 1974.
    S.N. Kacker and Shri Narain for the Appellants.
    Harish N. Salve, Mrs. P.S. Shroff, S.S. Shroff and	S.A.
Shroff for the Respondents.
    The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
    SHARMA, J. This appeal by special leave arises out of  a
suit filed by the respondent for setting aside the decree in
an  earlier suit being Suit No. 61-A of 1955  instituted  by
Dammu  Lal,  husband of the respondent No. 1 and  father  of
respondent No. 2 to 12, for eviction of the appellants	from
a  building  in	 Raipur	 which is  in  their  occupation  as
tenants.  Dammu Lal also prayed for a decree for arrears  of
rent and damages. The prayer for eviction was allowed  along
with a money decree for Rs.260 as arrears of rent and Rs.137
as damages the tenants filed an appeal which was numbered as
Civil  Appeal  No 7-A of 1965. During the  pendency  of	 the
appeal	Dammu  Lal died and his legal  representatives	were
substituted as respondents. Some of his children were  minor
who were placed under the guardianship- of their mother Smt.
Sugandhibai, respondent No. l. An application purporting  to
be  a compromise petition on behalf of all the	parties	 was
filed  before the court which was recorded and the suit	 was
disposed  of  in  its  terms  by  the  appellate  court	  on
23.4.1966. According to the compromise the entire decree was
set  aside  and	 the suit was dismissed,  with	the  parties
bearing their own costs. The respondents have challenged the
compromise decree by the present suit.
    2.	The  trial court dismissed the suit. On	 appeal	 the
first  appellate court reversed the decision, set aside	 the
compromise  decree and directed the Civil Appel No.  7-A  of
1965  to be disposed of afresh1 in accordance with  law.  By
						  PG NO 198
the  impugned judgment the High Court dismissed	 the  second
appeal preferred by the appellants.
    3. Mr. Kacker, the learned counsel appearing in  support
of  the	 appeal, placed the facts relevant  to	the  several
questions  raised by the parties and decided by	 the  courts
below  and contended that the decision of the High Court  is
illegal on several grounds. We do not consider it  necessary
to go into all the questions disposed of by the courts below
as the respondents are, in our view, entitled to succeed  in
the suit on one of the several points urged on their  behalf
which is discussed below.
    4.	As  has	 been stated earlier,  some  of	 the  party-
respondents in Civil Appeal No. 7-A of 1965 including  Kamal
Kumar,	one  of the sons of Dammu Lal, were minor  and	were
represented  by	 Mr.  Makasdar, Advocate.  In  view  of	 the
provisions  of	Order XXXII, Rule 7 of	the	Code  of
Civil  Procedure,  it was essential for the  court  to	have
granted	 permission  to	 the  guardian	to  enter  into	 the
compromise   only   after  considering	all   the   relevant
circumstances. From the records of the case it appears	that
the  court before recording the compromise sanctioned  leave
in the following words:
    "As the appellant is prepared to forego the entire	cost
of the proceedings, it is in the interest of the minors	 and
benefit	 of the minors that this appeal be compromised.	 The
minor-respondents are represented by senior counsel and	 his
opinion	 is that it will be in the interest of the minor  to
compromise the appeal. In view of this, I have no reason  to
disagree with him. I am satisfied that the compromise is  in
the  interest of the minors, hence, I allow the	 application
and  grant  the necessary permission under Order 32  Rule  7
C.P.C.	to the learned counsel of the minor  respondents  to
compromise the appeal."
    On the face of it, the compromise was one sided  whereby
the  minors	were giving up their right under the  trial
court's	 decree	 both  in respect to  eviction	as  well  as
arrears	 of  rent  and	damages.  It  is  said	that  as   a
consideration for the compromise the appellants were  giving
up  their	right to claim costs which might have  been
decreed by the appellate court in case of their success	 c.n
merits. According to the respondents'	case which has	been
accepted by the two courts below the guardian of the  minors
was  guilty  of gross negligence in entering  into  the	 com
promise by failing to take into account the interest of	 the
minors.	 On behalf of the appellants it has  been  contended
						  PG NO 199
that during the pendency of Civil Appeal No. 7-A of 1965 the
M.P. Accommodation Control Act was passed and the decree  of
the trial court was likely to be set aside. In that view, it
is  urged, the minor's guardian through Mr.  Makasdar  acted
rightly in settling the dispute and thus saving a decree for
costs which could have been passed against them.
    5. According to the further case of the respondents	 the
relevant circumstances and the terms of the compromise	were
never  explained  to the respondent No. 1 and  Mr.  Mokasdar
asked	for  the  court's  permission  to  enter  into	 the
compromise  on behalf of the minor without  any	 instruction
from  their guardian in this regard. It is also	 urged	that
the  language  of the order whereby the	 court	granted	 its
permission  indicates that the court did not apply its	mind
independently.	However, we do not consider it necessary  to
decide	these  points as also several others raised  by	 the
parties	 as  in our view the compromise decree must  be	 set
aside on the ground of gross negligence.
    6. It has not been suggested on behalf of the appellants
in  the present case that there was any ground available  to
them  to successfully challenge the money decree  passed  in
the  earlier  suit. Mr. Kacker also has	 not  suggested	 any
possible  ground  against  that	 part  of  the	decree.	 He,
however,  said	that the decree was not	 for  a	 substantial
amount as it was for less than Rs.400, and should  therefore
be ignored for the purposes of this case. The question as to
whether	 the amount was substantial or not has to be  judged
in  the	 light of the circumstances in the  case.  Here	 the
building in question was a small one fetching a small amount
of  rent  and  a  sum of Rs.400	 could	not  be	 ignored  as
inconsequential	  or  unsubstantial.  It  has  also  to	  be
remembered  that even the cost in such a suit which was	 the
sole  consideration for the compromise could not be a  large
sum.  Besides,	neither the minors advocate  nor  the  court
appears to have really considered the impact of the rent Act
on  the	 fate of the appeal which came in force	 during	 the
pendency  of  the litigation. We, therefore, hold  that	 the
compromise  decree is fit to be set aside, and the  decision
of  the	 court	below does not call  for  any  interference.
Accordingly Civil Appeal No. 7-A of 1965 is restored to	 its
file  before  the II Additional District Judge,	 Raipur	 and
will  now be disposed of in accordance with law. The  appeal
is dismissed with costs payable to respondents No. I to 12.
P. S . S .				 Appeal dismissed .




