

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Chief Engineer And Secretary, ... vs K.S. Brar & Anr. Etc on 1 September, 1988Equivalent citations: 1988 AIR 2106, 1988 SCR  797
Author: M Kania
Bench: Kania, M.H.
           PETITIONER:
CHIEF ENGINEER AND SECRETARY, ENGINEERINGDEPARTMENT, FOR AND

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
K.S. BRAR & ANR. ETC.

DATE OF JUDGMENT01/09/1988

BENCH:
KANIA, M.H.
BENCH:
KANIA, M.H.
DUTT, M.M. (J)

CITATION:
 1988 AIR 2106		  1988 SCR  797
 1988 SCC  Supl.  756	  JT 1988 (3)	581
 1988 SCALE  (2)766


ACT:
    Punjab Service of Engineers Class II P. W.D.  (Buildings
    & Roadways Branch) Rules, 1965, Rules 10 and 12--Appointment
    of  officer by transfer--Assignment of seniority  in  public
    interest--Whether   can	 be  assigned  from  the   date	  of
    deputation which is prior to the date of absorption.
    %
        Rule  10  of the Punjab Service of Engineers  Class	 II,
    P.W.D. (Buildings and Roadways Branch) Rules, 1965  provides
    that the Government may, in special circumstances, with	 the
    approval  of  the Commission, appoint an of,officer  to	 the
    service	 by transfer. Sub-rule (5) of Rule 12 of  the  rules
    lays down that any person appointed to a post in the service
    as  an	Assistant  Engineer  by	 transfer  can	be  assigned
    seniority  as of a date earlier than the date of  absorption
    provided this is done in the interest of the public  service
    and  the  seniority  thus fixed shall in  no  case  be	more
    favorable  than the seniority determined after allowing	 him
    credit for the period of service rendered by him in previous
appointment as Assistant Engineer.

HELD:

    The	 appellant,  in	 Civil	Appeal	No.  3100  of	1988
(hereinafter  referred	to  as respondent No. 4	 as  in	 the
Tribunal)  was	an Assistant Engineer in the  Punjab  Public
Works	Department.  He	 was  deputed  to  work	  with	 the
Engineering  Department	 of  Chandigarh	 Administration	  on
October	 7, 1972 and was absorbed in the said Department  on
June  17,  1978,  at his request, However,  he	was  granted
seniority  w.e.f.  October  7, 1972 being the  date  of	 his
joining	 as  an	 Assistant Engineer  on	 deputation  in	 the
Chandigarh   Administration.
    One K.S. Brar (hereinafter referred to as petitioner  as
in the Tribunal) joined the Chandigarh Administration as  an
Assistant  Engineer on June 24, 1976. He  challenged  before
the Tribunal the seniority of respondent No. 4 on the ground
that  the  order of absorption of respondent No.  4  in	 the
Chandigarh Administration and the order fixing his seniority
were  not  in  public interest or in  the  interest  of	 the
						   PG NO 797
						   PG NO 798
service.  The  Tribunal allowed the  petition  holding	that
respondent  No.	 4  should be placed at the  bottom  of	 the
gradation  list	 of  officers of his  category	and  granted
seniority from the date he was absorbed in the cadre.  Hence
these  appeals by special leave by respondent No. 4 and	 the
Chandigarh Administration respectively.
    It	was contended on behalf of respondent No. 4(a)	that
the  question  of  regularity or validity of  the  order  of
absorption  was	 irrelevant to the question of	fixation  of
seniority;  and (b) that the Chandigarh	 Administration	 was
entitled  to assign a seniority to respondent No. 4 from   a
date  prior  to	 the  date of  his  absorption	as  per	 the
provisions  of subrule (5) of Rule 12 of the Rules. It	was,
on  the	 other	hand, argued on	 behalf	 of  the  respondent
(petitioner  before the Tribunal) that, as the	transfer  of
respondent  No.	 4  and	 his  appointment  as  an  Assistant
Engineer  in  the Chandigarh Administration was at  his	 own
request, he should be placed at the bottom of the  seniority
list as on the date of absorption.
	   Allowing the appeals,
    HELD:  (1)	For the question of  determining  seniority,
what  one  has to see is not Rule 10 but Rule 12(5)  of	 the
said  Rules. The Tribunal completely failed to	notice	Rule
12(5)  and,  probably, it was because of this that  it	fell
into the error of coming to the conclusion that it did. This
appears	 clear from the fact that there is no  reference  to
Rule 12(5) at all in the judgment of the Tribunal.  [803C-D,
804B-C]
    2(i)  The Notification dated 14.1.19X0 relating  to	 the
fixation of seniority of Respondent No. 4 expressly sets out
that the order assigning a higher seniority to him has	been
passed by the Chandigarh Administration taking into  account
all the circumstances of the case and keeping in view public
interest  and after considering the representations made  in
connection  with  the  tentative seniority  list  which	 was
circulated earlier. By the said order seniority is  assigned
to  Respondent	No. 4 with effect from	7.10.1972  which  is
clearly	 within the limits laid down in the proviso to	Rule
12(5) of the said Rules. [803D-E,G]
    2(ii)  Respondent  No.  4  was  first  appointed  as  an
Assistant Engineer through the Public Service Commission  in
July 1968 whereas the petitioner was appointed to a  similar
post as late as on June 24, 1976. Respondent No. 4 was	thus
holding	 the  post  of an Assistant Engineer  prior  to	 the
petitioner.  As	 far as the qualifications  go,	 it  appears
prima facie that the qualifications of Respondent No. 4 are
						   PG NO 799
better than those of the petitioner and certainly, not lower
than those of the petitioner. No oblique motive for granting
a  higher seniority to Respondent No. 4 is shown.  In  these
circumstances,	it  is not possible to say  that  the  order
assigning  seniority  to Respondent No. 4 as  aforesaid	 has
been passed merely under the guise of Public interest. [803-
804H, A-B]


JUDGMENT:

CIVIL  APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal Nos.  3099	 and
3100 of 1988.
    From  the Judgment dated 17.9.87 passed by	the  Central
Administrative	Tribunal,  Chandigarh Bench,  Chandigarh  in
O.A. No. T-5/CH of 1987.
    .Kapil  Sibbal,  G.L. Sanghi, Ms. Kamini  Jaiswal,	P.N.
Puri, R.K. Chopra and Ravinder Chopra for the Petitioners
V.C. Mahajan and S.C. Patel for the Respondents
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
KANIA,	J. Special Leave granted in both the  petitions.
The  Registry  is  directed to	register  and  number  these
petitions as Civil Appeals.
    These  Appeals are both directed against a	judgment  of
the Central Administrative Tribunal, Chandigarh Bench, dated
September 17, 1987. The Appeal arising out of Special  Leave
Petition  No  15073  of	 1987  has  been  preferred  by	 the
Chandigarh Administration, Chandigarh and the Appeal arising
out  of	 Special Leave Petition No 11877 of  1987  has	been
preferred  at the instance of Puranjit Singh  Writ  petition
No.  3287 of 1978 filed in the Punjab & Haryana	 High  Court
was  transferred to the said Tribunal and treated as T.A  No
T-5/CH	of  1987 and it is the judgment of the	Tribunal  in
this  petition	which is impugned before us. The  said	writ
petition  was filed by K.S Brar who is Respondent No.  1  in
Special Leave Petition No 15()73 of 1987 and Respondent	 No.
4  in  Special	Leave Petition No. 11877  of  1987  Puranjit
Singh, the petitioner in Special Leave Petition No 11877  of
1987  was  Respondent No. 4 in the said	 writ  petition	 and
Chandigarh Administration and its officers were	 Respondents
Nos.  1	 to 3 We propose to refer to the  parties  by  their
description in the said writ petition.
    Respondent No. 4 was appointed as an Assistant  Engineer
in  the Punjab Public Works Department (Irrigation Wing)  on
						   PG NO 800
July 15, 1968 on selection through the Punjab Public Service
Commission. On October 7, 1972 Respondent No. 4 was  deputed
to   work   with  the  Chandigarh  Administration   in	 its
Engineering Department as an Assistant Engineer. On June  24
1976 the petitioner joined the Chandigarh Administration  as
an  Assistant Engineer as a direct recruit by his  selection
through the Union Public Service Commission. Respondent	 No.
4  made	 an  application,  while  on  deputation  with	 the
Administration	of  the Union Territory of  Chandigarh,	 for
absorbing  him in the cadre of Sub-Divisional  Engineers  in
the  Engineering Department at Chandigarh. His	request	 was
acceded	 to by the Administration and by an order passed  by
the  Home Secretary on June 17, 1978 he was absorbed in	 the
Engineering Department as a Sub- Divisional Engineer (B & R)
in  the Chandigarh Administration, working on deputation  in
the Housing Board, Chandigarh. The order absorbing him as  a
Sub-Divisional	Engineer was incorporated in a	Notification
dated  March  1,  1979, which was duly	Gazetted.  The	said
Notification  sets  out that the Chief	Commissioner,  Union
Territory, Chandigarh, in consulation with the Union  Public
Service	 Commission,  New  Delhi,  is  pleased	to   appoint
Puranjit  Singh as Assistant Engineer (Civil), Class II,  in
the  Engineering Department of Chandigarh Administration  on
buildings  and	roads side, by transfer from  Punjab,  P.W.D
Buildings and Roads Branch, and that his appointment will be
subject to further provisions of P.W D Class II Rules,	1965
as   applicable	 to  the  Engineering  Department   of	 the
Chandigarh  Administration.  There is no mention  of  public
interest  or  interest	of the service in  this	 order.	 The
consent	 of the State of Punjab as well as the	approval  of
the  Union  Public Service Commission with  regard  to	this
appointment   of  Respondent  No  4  was  duly	 taken.	  On
consideration, a tentative seniority list was circulated  on
November 19, 1979 inviting objections and after hearing	 the
objections  Respondent	No.  4 was  granted  seniority	with
effect	from October 7, 1972, being the date of his  joining
as  an	Assistant  Engineer  on	 deputation  in	 the  P.W.D.
Buildings and Roads Branch of the Chandigarh Administration.
The   Notification  dated  14.1.1980  granting	 him   final
seniority  sets out inter alia as follows:
    "AND  WHEREAS the Chandigarh  Administration  considered
all  the  circumstances of the case and keeping	 the  public
interest  in  view, fixed the tentative	 seniority  of	Shri
Puranjit Singh w.e.f. 7.10.1972, the date of his joining  as
Assistant Engineer in P.W.D. Buildings & Roads Branch
						   PG NO 801
    Now,  therefore,  in pursuance of rule  12.5  of  Punjab
Service of Engineers, Class II, P.W.D. (Buildings and  Roads
Branch)	 Rules,	 1965, the  Chief  Commissioner,  Chandigarh
Administration is pleased to order the fixation of seniority
of   Shri  Puranjit  Singh  as	Assistant  Engineer   w.e.f.
7.10.1972 ........."
    From this it is clear that Respondent No. 4 was  granted
seniority  with effect from 7.10.1972 when he was  appointed
on deputation as Assistant Engineer in P.W.D. (Buildings and
Roads Branch) as stated earlier. The petitioner in the writ.
petition   challenged  both  the  order	 of  absorption	  of
Respondent  No. 4 in the Chandigarh Administration  and	 the
order  fixing his seniority on the ground that these  orders
were  not  in  public interest or in  the  interest  of	 the
service. However, at the hearing before the Tribunal, at the
very  outset,  learned Counsel for the	petitioner  made  it
clear  that  he	 was  not  challenging	the  absorption	  of
Respondent No. 4 but only the placement of the petitioner in
the  seniority	list  and  the	assigning  of  seniority  to
Respondent  No. 4 from the date he was taken on	 deputation,
namely,	 7.10.1972.  The contention of	the  petitioner	 was
that,  since Respondent No. 4 was appointed by	transfer  to
the  Chandigarh Administration at his own request, he  ought
to  have been placed at the bottom of the seniority list  in
the year of absorption and below the petitioner.  Curiously,
although the challenge to the order absorbing Respondent No.
4 in the service of the Chandigarh Administration was  given
up  by the petitioner, the Tribunal came to the	 conclusion,
on the basis of Rule lO of the Punjab Service of  Engineers,
Class	II,  P.W.D.  (Buildings	 and  Roads  Branch)   Rules
(referred  to  hereinafter as "the said Rules'').  that	 the
order	of   absorption	 was  not  valid   as	no   special
circumstances had been set out or shown justifying the	same
and  hence,  there was a lacuna in the order.  The  Tribunal
held  that, as a result of this Respondent No. 4  should  be
placed	at the bottom of the gradation list of	officers  of
his  category  and granted seniority from the  date  he	 was
absorbed  in  the  cadre, namely, February 9,  1979.  It  is
against	  this	 decision   that   both,   the	  Chandigarh
Administration	and  Respondent No. 4, have come by  way  of
these Appeals.
    It	was  urged  by learned Counsel	for  the  Chandigarh
Administration as well as learned Counsel for Respondent No.
4  that the question of regularity or validity of the  order
of absorption was irrelevant to the question of fixation  of
seniority.  It	was submitted by them that, in view  of	 the
challenge  to  the order of absorption of Respondent  No.  4
having been specifically given up by learned Counsel for the
petitioner  before  the	 Tribunal, it was not  open  to	 the
						   PG NO 802
Tribunal  to  consider	the  question  of  validity  of	 the
absorption  at all, and that as per the provisions  of	sub-
rule  (5)  of  Rule  12 of the	said  Rules  the  Chandigarh
Administration	was  entitled  to  assign  a  seniority	  to
Respondent  No.	 4  from a date prior to  the  date  of	 his
absorption  in the interest of the public service and  after
taking	into  account  all the	circumstances  of  the	case
provided  that	Respondent  No.	 4  could  not	be   granted
seniority  more	 favourably than  the  seniority  determined
after allowing him credit for the period of service rendered
by him in his previous appointment as Assistant Engineer. It
was, on the other hand, contended by learned Counsel for the
petitioner that, as the transfer of Respondent No. 4 and his
appointment  as	 an  Assistant Engineer	 in  the  Chandigarh
Administration	was at his own request, he should be  placed
at  the	 bottom	 of the seniority list as  on  the  date  of
absorption.
    In order to appreciate these respective contentions,  it
is necessary to set out the relevant provisions. Rule 10  of
the  said  Rules provides for the appointment  in  Class  II
service by transfer and reads as under:
    "The  Government may in special circumstances  with	 the
approval  of  the  Commission, appoint	an  Officer  to	 the
service by transfer."
Sub-Rule (5) of Rule 12 of the said Rules reads thus:
    "  12(5)  in  the case of an  of  officer  appointed  by
transfer  as an Assistant Engineer, while normally he  would
be  placed junior to all the officers appointed directly  or
by  promotion as Assistant Engineers in a  particular  year,
the Government may in the interest of the public service and
taking into consideration all the circumstances of the case,
fix his seniority on ad hoc basis.
    Provided that the seniority thus fixed shall in no case,
be  more  favourably  than the	seniority  determined  after
allowing  him credit for the period of service	rendered  by
him  in previous appointment as Assistant Engineer or  on  a
post  the duties of which in the opinion of  the  Government
are of equivalent or greater responsibility The decision  of
Government on this point shall be final "
     As	 far  as  the  appointment of  Respondent  No  4  as
						   PG NO 803
Assistant  Engineer  in	 the  chandigarh  Administration  is
concerned,  we must proceed on the footing that it was	made
at  his	 own  request. Rule 10 of  the	said  Rules  clearly
provided  that	such  an appointment can  be  made  only  in
special	 circumstances. In our view, where the request	made
by  the officer concerned is based on circumstances  showing
the request for transfer is justified, this might be  looked
up  as a special circumstance. It was, however, pointed	 out
by  learned  Counsel for the petitioner that  the  order  of
appointment  by	 transfer  does not  refer  to	any  special
circumstance and hence, the appointment of Respondent No.  4
in  the Chandigarh Administration by transfer is itself	 not
regular. However, we do not wish to go into the question  as
to  whether such an appointment could be said to be  invalid
or  irregular  merely because no special  circumstances	 has
been recited in the order because the challenge to the order
appointing Respondent No 4 by transfer has been specifically
given up by the petitioner in the Tribunal. In our view, for
the  question of determining seniority, what one has to	 see
is  not Rule 10 but Rule 12(5) of the said Rules  which,  in
terms,	provides that any person appointed to a post in	 the
service in question by transfer can be assigned seniority as
of a date earlier than the date of absorption provided	this
is   done  in  the  interest  of  the  public  service	 The
Notification  dated  14 1 1980 relating to the	fixation  of
seniority  of  Respondent No 4 expressly sets out  that	 the
order assigning a higher seniority to him has been passed by
the  Chandigarh Administration taking into account  all	 the
circumstances  of  the	case  and  keeping  in	view  public
interest  and after considering the representations made  in
connection  with  the  tentative seniority  list  which	 was
circulated  earlier  The said Notification, in	its  earlier
portion, recites that Respondent No 4 was appointed on	July
15, 1968 as an Assistant Engineer (Civil) in the Punjab	 P.W
D  (Irrigation	Branch)	 and that he  was  appointed  as  an
Assistant Engineer (Civil) in the Buildings and Roads Branch
of Punjab P W D on October 7 1972 through the Public Service
Commission  and	 joined	 on deputation	in  the	 Engineering
Department  of	the Chandigarh Administration  By  the	said
order seniority is assigned to Respondent No. 4 with  effect
from 7.10.1972 which is clearly within the limits laid	down
in  the proviso to Rule 12(5) of the said Rules In  view  of
this, the order granting him seniority as aforesaid  appears
ex facie to be in order. It was urged by learned Counsel for
the  petitioner	 that,	although public	 interest  has	been
referred to in the said Notification, it is clear that	this
consideration  was  not	 in  the  mind	of  the	  Chandigarh
Administration at all but the appointment was made to favour
Respondent  No	l We are afraid that there is  no  basis  on
which such a submission can be founded. Respondent No. 4 was
first appointed as an Assistant Engineer through the  Public
						   PG NO 804
Service Commission in July 1968 whereas the  petitioner	 was
appointed  to  a similar post as late as on June  24,  1976.
Respondent  No. 4 was thus holding the post of an  Assistant
Engineer   prior   to  the  petitioner.	 As   far   as	 the
qualifications	 go,  it  appears  prima  facie	  that	 the
qualifications of Respondent No. 4 are better than those  of
the  petitioner and certainly, not lower than those  of	 the
petitioner.   No  oblique  motive  for	granting  a   higher
seniority  to  Respondent  No. 4 is shown to  us.  In  these
circumstances,	it  is not possible to say  that  the  order
assigning  seniority  to Respondent No. 4 as  aforesaid	 has
been  passed merely under the guise of public  interest.  In
our  view,  the Tribunal completely failed  to	notice	Rule
12(5)  of  the said Rules and, probably, it was	 because  of
this that it fell into the error of coming to the conclusion
that it did. This appears clear from the fact that there  is
no  reference  to Rule 12(5) at all in the judgment  of	 the
Tribunal.
    In the result, the appeals are allowed, the judgment and
order  passed by the Tribunal are set aside and validity  of
the order dated 14 1.198() fixing seniority of Respondent No
4 is upheld.
    Looking to the circumstances of the case, there will  be
no order as to costs
     M.L.A			   Appeals allowed .

