

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Madhu Gopal vs Vi Additional District Judge & Ors on 26 September, 1988Equivalent citations: 1989 AIR  155, 1988 SCR  Supl. (3) 276
Author: S Mukharji
Bench: Mukharji, Sabyasachi (J)
           PETITIONER:
MADHU GOPAL

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
VI ADDITIONAL DISTRICT JUDGE & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT26/09/1988

BENCH:
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)
BENCH:
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)
RANGNATHAN, S.

CITATION:
 1989 AIR  155		  1988 SCR  Supl. (3) 276
 1988 SCC  (4) 644	  JT 1988 (4)	106
 1988 SCALE  (2)1273


ACT:
    U.P.  Urban Buildings (Regulation of Letting,  Rent	 and
Eviction)  Act	1972/U.P.  Urban  Buildings  (Regulation  of
Letting,   Rent	  and	Eviction)   Rules,   1972.   Section
16(5)(a)/Rule 10(9)--Review of order of release/Allotment--A
landlord  even though not in actual possession can  ask	 for
review of the order.



HEADNOTE:
    The	 petitioner  in the Special Leave  Petition  is	 the
tenant,	 Respondent No. 3 was one of the five  co-owners  of
the petition premises.
    On	January 28, 1978, one of the co-owners who had	sole
possession of the shop vacated the shop and sent  intimation
of  the vacancy to the Rent Controller under the U.P.  Urban
Buildings  (Regulation of Letting and Eviction)	 Act,  1972.
The petitioner filed allotment application for the said shop
and he was the sole applicant.
    The	 Rent  Control Officer directed	 the  petitioner  to
appear	in  the allotment proceedings, called for  a  report
from  the  Inspector, found one of the co-owners  to  he  in
possession  of	the shop and that he  had  discontinued	 the
business and was going to let out the shop. The 3 other	 co-
owners	never  objected to the petitioner's tenancy  on	 the
allotment order. The allotment letter was accordingly passed
on  12th February.1978, and possession was taken up  by	 the
petitioner thereafter.
    On	or about 25th February, 1978 the 3rd respondent	 who
was a non-occupant owner filed an application under  section
16(5) of the Act	i.e. after 25 days of the allotment,
for  review  of the order. The Rent Controller	allowed	 the
review application and cancelled the allotment order.
    The	 Additional  District  Judge  having  dismissed	 the
revision  petition, the petitioner filed a writ petition  in
the High Court.
   The	question  about the maintainability  of	 the  review
application  under section 16(5) of the Act at the  instance
						  PG NO 276
						  PG NO 277
of  a  non-occupant  owner  having  arisen  the	 matter	 was
referred  to a Full Bench and by a majority, the Bench	came
to the conclusion that such an application was maintainable.
    Dismissing the Special Leave Petition,
    HELD:   1.	A  landlord,  even  though  not	 in   actual
possession  at the time of the possession of  the  property,
can  ask  for review of the order of release  or  allotment.
[280G]
    2.	A landlord has a right to the property. The  section
should	not  be	 so  construed as to  defeat  the  right  to
possession  of	property  in appropriate  cases	 unless	 the
intention of the Legislature is manifest. [280F]
    3. Section 16(5)(a) speaks of 'where the landlord or any
other	person'.  Hence,  two  categories  of  persons	 are
contemplated i.e. a land-lord, or any other person. [280C]
    4.	The requirement of the sub-section, to be in  lawful
occupation of the building or any part thereof, applies only
in  case  of  any  other person claiming  to  be  in  lawful
occupation and not in case of landlord. The Section has used
the   expression  "or"	and  so	 the  expression   "or"	  is
disjunctive   of   these  two  categories  to	be   treated
separately.   Hence,  the  requirement	to  be	 in   lawful
occupation,  is not there is case of an application  by	 the
landlord. [280C-D]
    5.	The proviso puts an embargo of 7 days in making	 the
application for review. It can only apply to those who	were
in  lawful  occupation	at the time of	the  making  of	 the
original  Order.  It  cannot  curtail  the  rights  of	 the
landlord. as such, it only affects any other person who	 was
in lawful occupation. [280E-G]
    Niren  Kumar Das v. 7he District Judge, Pilibhit &	Ors.
AIR 1977 Allahabad 47, approved.



JUDGMENT:
    CIVIL  APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Special  Leave  Petition
(Civil) No. 6577 of 1988.
    From the Judgment and order dated 27.4.1988 of the	High
Court of Allahabad in C.M.W. No. 3777 of 1987.
    G.L. Sanghi and Manoj Prasad for the Petitioner.
						  PG NO 278
    The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
    SABYASACHI	MUKHARJI, J. This application for  leave  to
appeal under Article 136 of the Constitution arises from the
judgment  and  order of the High Court of  Allahabad,  dated
27th  April,  1988  by	the  judgment  under  challenge	 the
Division   Bench  by  majority	directed  the	Addl.	City
Magistrate or the Officer at present exercising the power of
Distt.	Magistrate  under  Rule	 10(9)	of  the	 U.P.  Urban
Buildings  (Regulation	of Letting, Rent &  Eviction)  Rules
1972 to issue notice on all the five landlords mentioned  in
the petition within one week of the filing of the  certified
copy  of  the  Order, and thereafter to	 make  an  Order  in
accordance  with  law and in the light of  the	observations
made  in the said Judgment. The petitioner before  the	High
Court,	who is the petitioner herein also, was directed	 not
to be dispossessed until disposal of the matter by the	High
Court.
    This  application  is  by  the  tenant-petitioner.	 The
premises  in  question had five co-owners,  namely,  Veeresh
Saxena,	 R.C.  Saxena. D.C. Saxena, Smt. Shanti	 Saxena	 and
B.S. Saxena, respondent No. 3. Until January, 1978,  Veeresh
Saxena was in sole and exclusive actual physical  possession
of the shop and carried on business in it. In January,	1978
the  present petitioner filed allotment application for	 the
shop  and he was the sole applicant. On	 28.1.1978,  Veeresh
Saxena	vacated the shop and sent intimation of	 vacancy  to
the  Rent  Control Officer under the  U.P.  Urban  Buildings
(Regulation  of Letting & Eviction) Act,  1972	(hereinafter
called	the Act). The Rent Control Officer,  then,  directed
him  to	 appear in the allotment proceedings  The  Inspector
reported  that Veeresh Saxena was found to be in  possession
of the shop, discontinuing the business and was going to let
out the shop. On the Inspector's report being pasted on	 the
Notice	Board  of the Rent Controller Office,  neither	B.S.
Saxena	nor  the  other 3  co-owners  filed  any  objection.
Veeresh	 Saxena filed an affidavit before the  Rent  Control
Officer	 that  he  wanted  to  let  out	 the  shop  to	 the
petitioner.  The  3 other co-owners never  objected  to	 the
petitioner`s  tenancy on the allotment order throughout	 the
last  10 years. The allotment letter was accordingly  passed
on  12th  February, 1978.  The possession  was,	 thereafter,
taken  up, it was alleged by the petitioner in	the  special
leave  petition.  The  petitioner had alleged  that  he	 had
invested more than Rs.2 lakhs in the shop, but B.S.  Saxena.
who  was  a non-occupant owner, on or about  25th  February,
1978  filed an application under section 16(5) of  the	Act,
after 25 days of allotment, for review of the Order. It	 was
alleged	  by   the   petitioner	 that	the   evidence	 was
overwhelmingly	in  support of the fact that  he  had  taken
						  PG NO 279
possession of the premises on or about 4/5th February, 1978.
The  Rent  Controller, however, on the said  application  of
B.S. Saxena allowed the review application and cancelled the
allotment order.  revision against the said order was  filed
before	the learned Judge under section 18 of the  Act.	 The
learned	 Addl.	Distt.	Judge dismissed	 the  revision.	 The
petitioner,  thereafter, filed a writ petition in  the	High
Court of Allahabad .
    The	 question  arose about the  maintainability  of	 the
review	application  under section 16(5) of the Act.  It  is
upon this point that the matter has been agitated before us.
There was a difference of opinion about the  maintainability
of the review application at the instance of a	non-occupant
owner  and the matter was referred to a Bench of  3  learned
Judges	and  by	 majority the Division	Bench  came  to	 the
conclusion  that such an application was  maintainable.	 The
petitioner herein contends that the High Court was wrong  in
the view it took on the construction of Section 16(5)(b)  of
the Act.
    The relevant provisions of the said sub-section read  as
follow:
    "(5)(a) Where the landlord or any other person  claiming
to  be lawful occupant of the building or any  part  thereof
comprised  in the allotment or release order  satisfies	 the
District  Magistrate  that  such  order	 was  not  made	  in
accordance with clause (a) or clause (b) as the case may  be
of  sub-section (I), the District Magistrate may review	 the
order:
    Provided 1hat no application under this clause shall  be
entertained later than seven days after the eviction of such
person .
    (b)	 Where the District Magistrate on review under	this
sub-section sets aside or modifies his order of allotment or
release,  he shall put or cause to be put the applicant,  if
already	 evicted, back into possession of the building,	 and
may  for that purpose use or cause to be used such force  as
may be necessary.
    (6) x x x
    (7) Every order under this section shall subJect to	 any
order made under sec. 18 be final."
						  PG NO 280
    The contention is that a landlord who was not in  actual
physical  possession until making of the allotment order  or
is evicted in pursuant thereof, is not competent to make  an
application  for  review of the allotment order	 or  release
order  under section 16(5)(a) & (b) of the Act.	 Admittedly,
as mentioned hereinbefore, the respondent applicant was	 not
in  occupation	when the Order was made.  He  was,  however,
indisputably a landlord. So, the question is whether on	 the
construction of the section, a landlord who Is not in actual
physical  possession  at the time of the release  order,  is
entitled under the law to apply for review of the order. The
High Court held that he is entitled.
    We	are  of the opinion that the High Court	 was  right.
Section 16(5)(a) speaks of 'where the landlord or any  other
person'.   Hence,there	 are  two  categories	of   persons
contemplated  i.e.  a  landlord, or any	 other	person.	 The
requirement  of sub-section, to be in lawful  occupation  of
the  building or any part thereof, applies Only in  case  of
Lany other person claiming to be in lawful occupation and not
in  case of landlord. The Section has used the expression  '
or"  and  so the expression or is disjunctive of  these	 two
categories to be treated separately. Hence, the	 requirement
to  be	in  lawful occupation. is not there in	case  of  an
application by the landlord.
    Mr.	 G.L.  Sanghi,	learned counsel	 appearing  for	 the
tenant, has sought to argue that by virtue of the proviso  a
landlord  who  was not in occupation, was  not	entitled  to
apply.	We  are unable to accept this. The proviso  puts  an
embargo	 of 7 days in making the application for review.  It
can only apply to those who were in lawful occuaption at the
time of the making of the original Order. It cannot  curtail
the  rights  of the landlord, as such, it only	affects	 any
other person who was lawful occupation. In any event, it  is
a well-settled principle of construction that unless clearly
indicated, a proviso would not away substantive rights given
by  the Section or the sub-section. A land lord has a  right
to  the property. The Section should not be construed as  to
defeat	the right to possession of property  in	 appropriate
cases unless the intention of the Legislature is manifest We
find no such clear intention in the facts of this case.
    We	are, therefore,. of the opinion that the High  Court
came to the correct conclusion that a landlord, even  though
not  in	 actual	 physical  possession at  the  time  of	 the
possession of the property. call ask for review of the order
of release or allotment. It must be borne in mind that	this
view  was  also expressed by Mr. Justice  N.D.Ojha,  as	 our
learned brother then was, in his judgment in Niren Kumar Das
v.  The District Judge, Pilibhit & Ors., AIR 1977  Allahabad
						  PG NO 281
47. We agree with that interpretation.
    In that view of the matter, there is no substance in the
contentions   urged  in	 the  specil  leave  petition.	 The
application is, therefore,rejected.
N.V.K.					 Petition dismissed.




