

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Hindustan Thompson Associates ... vs Mrs. Maya Inderson Israni & Ors on 19 September, 1988Equivalent citations: 1989 AIR   87, 1988 SCR  Supl. (3)  29
Author: B Ray
Bench: Ray, B.C. (J)
           PETITIONER:
HINDUSTAN THOMPSON ASSOCIATES LTD.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
MRS. MAYA INDERSON ISRANI & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT19/09/1988

BENCH:
RAY, B.C. (J)
BENCH:
RAY, B.C. (J)
SEN, A.P. (J)

CITATION:
 1989 AIR   87		  1988 SCR  Supl. (3)  29
 1988 SCC  (4) 745	  JT 1988 (3)	786
 1988 SCALE  (2)820
 CITATOR INFO :
 D	    1990 SC1563	 (14,15)


ACT:
    Bombay  Rents, Hotel and Lodging House  Rents  (Control)
Act,  1947:  Sections  5,  15A	and  21-Cooperative  Housing
Society-Possession  of	flat  obtained	through	 member	  of
Society	 who has committed breach of bye laws--Society	call
seek  eviction	under  Section	91  Maharashtra	 Cooperative
Societies Act, 1960 Rent Act inapplicable.
%
    Maharashtra Cooperative Societies Act, 1960: Section 91-
Cooperative  housing society-Cooperative Court/Tribunal	 has
jurisdiction to order eviction from flat.



HEADNOTE:
    Respondent No. 2, a Co-operative Society allotted a flat
to  respondent	No. l. Respondent No. 2 sought	recovery  of
possession of the flat on the ground that the appellant	 was
inducted  into the flat without the written consent  of	 the
Society.  The  appellant pleaded that it was  continuing  in
possession of the flat on the basis of the lease and licence
agreement by payment of licence fee, and as such the dispute
did not come within Section 91 of the Co-operative Societies
Act  as	 it had become as tenant under Section	15A  of	 the
Bombay Rent Act. The Cooperative Court after hearing all the
parties	 made an award holding that the dispute fell  within
the  jurisdiction  of  the Cooperative Court  and  that	 the
appellant was occupying the flat in question as a trespasser
after  the  licence in its favour was  terminated  and	that
there  was no subsisting licence to occupy the flat  by	 the
appellant  on Ist February, 1973 and so Section 15A  of	 the
Bombay Rent Act was not applicable.
    The	 appellant's appeal to the Appellate  Authority	 and
writ  petition to the High Court having been dismissed,	 the
appellant appealed by special leave to this Court.
    Dismissing the Appeal,
    HELD:  1.  The  appellant is an outsider  who  has	been
permitted  to  possess	the suit  premises  as	licencee  of
respondent No. 2 in contravention of the Rules, bye-laws and
regulations  of	 the  society. The  dispute  falls  squarely
within the provision of section 91 of the Maharashtra
						   PG NO 29
						    PG NO 30
Cooperative Societies Act 1960 and the Cooperative Court has
exclusive  jurisdiction to entertain and decide the  dispute
and not the Court under the Bombay Rent Act, 1947.
    M/s.  A.V.R.  &  Co. &  Ors.  v.  Fairfield	 Cooperative
Housing Society Ltd., [1988] Supp. 3 S.C.R.48.
    2. The decree will not be executed for a period of	four
months. The appellant will not transfer, assign or  encumber
the  flat in any manner whatsoever, and	 hand-over  peaceful
possession  of	the  flat on or before	the  expiry  of	 the
aforesaid  period.  He	will go	 on  paving  the  occupation
charges equivalent to the amount he had been paying for each
month 7th of succeeding month. In default of compliance	 the
decree shall become executable forthwith. [31E-F]



JUDGMENT:
    CIVIL  APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No.  567  of
1987.
   From the Judgment and Order dated 12.1.1987 of the Bombay
High Court in W . P . No. l24/ 1987.
    B . R. Agarwala for the Appellant.
    Dr.	 L.M.  Singhvi,	 P.K. Banerjee,	 S.K.  Jain,  L	 .A.
Kriplani.  Dr.	A.M.  Singhvi and  S.  Bandopadhya  for	 the
Respondents.
    The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
    B.C.  RAY, J. The member of society Mrs.  Maya  Inderson
Israni who has been allotted the flat No.62 on 6th floor  of
Nibhana	 Building  by the disputant No.2,  the	Nibhana	 Co-
operative  Housing  Society. Ltd. and the  society  filed  a
dispute	 before the Judge Fifth Cooperative Court at  Bombay
for  recovery  of  possession  of the  said  flat  from	 the
opponents  who	are the appellants in this  appeal  and	 for
mesne  profits	in respect of the flat alleging	 inter	alia
that  the  appellants were inducted in th flat	without	 the
written consent of the Society as a licencee on the basis of
a leave and licence agreement which was a renewed from	time
to time till some time in 1972 and on Ist October 1972,	 the
member, that is, the respondent No.2 terminated the  licence
and called upon the appellant to remove itself from the said
flat. Thereafter an advocate s Letter dated 1st October 1972
was  sent  by  the respondent No. 2  to	 the  appellant	 for
vacating  the  flat. The appellant having failed  to  comply
with the request a dispute was filed by the
    H.T ASSOCIATES v. MRS. MAYA [RAY. J.]
member	as well as the Co-operative Society for eviction  of
the appellants from the flat, as well as for mesne  profits.
The plea of the appellants was that they were continuing  in
possession  of the flat on the basis of a leave and  licence
agreement  by payment of licence fee uptill now and as	such
the  dispute  does  not come within section 91	of  the	 Co-
operative  Societies Act as they have become  tenants  under
section 15 of Bombay Rent Act. The Co-operative Court  after
hearing	 the parties made an award holding that the  dispute
fell within the jurisdicton of the Co-operative Court as the
appellant  claimed  to	be h possession of  the	 flat  as  a
licencee  through the member of the society which is  a	 Co-
partnership  Housing  Society  under  the  Maharashtra	 Co-
operative Societies Act. It was also held that the appellant
was  occupying the flats in question as a  trespasser  after
the licence in favour of appellant was terminated. There was
no  subsisting licence to occupy the flat by the  appellants
on  1st February. 1973 and so Section 15 of the Bombay	Rent
Act  was  not applicable to it. An appeal was filed  by	 the
appellant  before the appellate authority. The	said  appeal
was  dismissed and the order of the Co-operative  Court	 was
upheld. The appellants filed a writ petition No. 1'4 of 1987
before	the  High Court of Bombay under Article 227  of	 the
Constitution.  The said Writ Petition was dismissed  by	 the
High  Court.  Hence this appeal by Special  Leave  has	been
filed by the appellant.
    In	view of our judgment in C.A. No. 472 of	 1985,	this
appeal	is  dismissed  without any order as  to	 costs.	 The
decree will not be executed for a period of four months from
the date of this order subject to the appellant s filling an
usual undertaking within a period of two weeks from today to
the  effect that the appellant will not transfer. assign  or
encumber  the flat in question in any manner whatsoever	 and
on undertaking that he will hand over peaceful possession of
the  flat  in question to the respondent on  or	 before	 the
expiry of the aforesaid period and he will go on paying	 the
occupation  charges  equivalent to the amount  he  had	been
paying	for  each month by the 7th of succeeding  month.  In
default	 of  compliance of any of these	 terms,	 the  decree
shall become executable forthwith.
N .V.K.					Appeal dismissed.




