

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Fasih Chaudhary vs Director General, Doordarshan & ... on 28 September, 1988Equivalent citations: 1989 AIR  157, 1988 SCR  Supl. (3) 282
Author: S Mukharji
Bench: Mukharji, Sabyasachi (J)
           PETITIONER:
FASIH CHAUDHARY

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
DIRECTOR GENERAL, DOORDARSHAN & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT28/09/1988

BENCH:
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)
BENCH:
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)
KANIA, M.H.
RANGNATHAN, S.

CITATION:
 1989 AIR  157		  1988 SCR  Supl. (3) 282
 1989 SCC  (1)	89	  JT 1988 (4)	 50
 1988 SCALE  (2)1079


ACT:
    Articles 226/136 of the  Constitution--T.V.Serial--Mirza
Ghalib-Selection   of-Whether	discriminatory--Scope	 and
exercise of authority by Doordarshan--Whether proper and  in
accordance with principle of fair-play.



HEADNOTE:
    With a view to produce T.V. Serials based on themes e.g.
national integration, Communal harmony, against exploitation
of  child labour, equal status for women  etc.,	 Doordarshan
invited proposals from producers sponsors. The last date for
submitting  such projects was 7th May, 1986 and it was	also
made  obligatory by Doordarshan that projects should  comply
with  the  guidelines prescribed by it. Clause	(2)  of	 the
guidelines  inter  alia	 required  that	 the  proposals	 for
sponsored  programs should consist of break up of the  story
in  episodes;  complete synopsis of each  episode;  detailed
scenario, script of at least one episode etc. As per  clause
(3)   of  the  guidelines  the	proposals  on	receipt	  by
Doordarshan   were   to	 be  given  a  reference   No.	 and
acknowledged.  The  guidelines also prescribed that  if	 any
proposal is not accompanied by any of the documents required
by the guidelines, that deficiency was to be pointed out  to
the producer of the proposal and was to be treated  complete
only  when all the requirements contained in the  guidelines
referred  to  above  are  complied with.  On  the  theme  of
national integration the Petitioner and Respondent No. 2 had
submitted projects on the life and history of the great urdu
poet Mirza Ghalib.
    The projects submitted by the Petitioner and by  another
person	were not approved/selected for telecast as the	same
were  not found to be either attractive or  interesting	 but
the  one  sent by Respondent No	 Gulzar--was  selected.	 The
Petitioner  challenged	the said action	 of  Doordarshan  as
arbitrary and based on malice by filing writ petition in the
High  Court  u/a  226  of the  Constitution  praying  for  a
direction  to  the  Union of India and	the  Doordarshan  to
accept	the script of the Petitioner and eventually to	give
him the contract. His contention before the  High Court	 was
mainly that Respondent No. 2-Shri GULZAR-had been  preferred
over the Petitioner by practising discrimination
						  PG NO 282
						  PG NO 283
nation in the matter of selection of T.V. Serial even though
the  Petitioner	 had submitted his project on 7th  May	1986
whilst Respondent No. 2 had not.
    The	 High  Court did not f~nd substance in	any  of	 the
contentions raised by the Petitioner and dismissed the	Writ
Petition. Against the order of the High Court of 13th  July,
1988  dismissing  the Writ Petition the Petitioner  filed  a
petition  for  special	leave  to  appeal  u/a	136  of	 the
Constitution.
    Dismissing the petition for Special leave, this Court,
    HELD:  That	 Respondent No. 2--Gulzar had  by  a  letter
dated  the  4th February, 1986 submitted the  theme  of	 the
matter	and  Doordarshan had asked him	to  furnish  further
details to make the proposal complete and after the proposal
was  so made complete, the same alongwith others was  placed
for   consideration  'before  the  Committee.	Though	 the
proposals  might  not  have  been  considered  strictly	  in
accordance  with  the  order of	 precedence  yet  they	were
considered fairly or reasonably. [285C; 286F-G]
    That  there was obJectivity in the actual  consideration
of  the different proposals and that there was	fairness  in
the  decision  and that no malice or ill-will  coloured	 the
decision-making process in the case. The Petitioner was	 not
refused proper consideration because Respondent 2  described
the petitioner as one who is a ~'maverick", on the  contrary
the serial submitted by the Petitioner was neither found  to
be attractive nor interesting. [287A-B]
    Ram	 & Shyam Co. v. State of Haryana & Ors.,  [l985]  3,
SCC  267  at  pp. 268 and 269 Haji T.M.	 Hassan	 Rawther  v.
Kerala	Financial  Corporation, AIR 1988 SC 157 at  p.	161,
referred to.



JUDGMENT:
    CIVIL  APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Special  Leave  Petition
(Civil) No. 9814 of 1988.
    From the Judgment and Order dated 13.7.1988 of the Delhi
High Court in C.W.P. No. 3423 of 1987.
    Govinda Mukhoty, R.N. Keswani, Irfan Ahmed and M.  Safid
for the Petitioner.
    Kuldip Singh, Additional Solicitor General, Mrs.  Sushma
Suri, Ms. Indu Goswami, Pinaki Mishra and Ms. Bina Gupta for
the Respondents.
						   PG NO 284
    The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
    SABYASACHI	MUKHARJI,  J. This petition is	for  special
leave  to  appeal  from the decision of the  High  Court  of
Delhi,	dated  13th July, 1988. By the said Order  the	High
Court  dismissed the writ petition filed by the	 petitioner.
In  the said writ petition, the petitioner had asked  for  a
direction  to the Union of India and/or the  Doordarshan  to
accept	the script of the petitioner and eventually to	give
him the contract. The High Court in its order recorded	that
there  was no substance in the allegation that Shri  Gulzar,
respondent  No.	 Z  herein,  had  been	preferred  over	 the
petitioner   by	 practising  discrimination.  There  was   a
proposal   to  produce	T.V.  serials  based   on   national
integration, communal harmony, against exploitation of child
labour,	 equal status for women etc. etc. and the last	date
for  submitting	 such  projects was 7th May,  1986.  It	 was
further announced by the Doordarshan that the project should
be  completed  in  terms of the	 guidelines  issued  by	 the
Doordarshan,  respondent  No.  1. The  said  guidelines	 for
sponsored  programme  to  be produced  by  sponsor  indicate
certain requirement for the proposals. The guidelines, inter
alia,  state in clause (2) that the proposals for  sponsored
programmes should consist of the following:
    (a)	 break-up of the story in episodes and broadline  of
treatment;
    (b) complete synopsis of each episode;
    (c)	 detailed scenario script of at least one  episodes;
and
   (d)	confirmed names and addresses of  Director,  Camera-
man,  Music Director, Script/Dialogue Writer,  Main  Artists
etc.
    Clause (3) of the said guidelines indicated further that
all  proposals received by the Doordarshan will be  given  a
reference  number  and acknowledge. In	case  proposals	 not
accompanied  by	 any of the  foregoing	documents  mentioned
aforesaid are received, a suitable indication would be given
by   the  Doordarshan  to  the	Producer  along	  with	 the
acknowledgment.	 It further indicated that a proposal  would
be  considered "complete" only after the required number  of
copies	of the documents mentioned aforesaid were  supplied.
It appears, therefore,that a proposal though not  containing
all  the  particulars would still be a Proposal	 but  not  a
"complete"  proposal but the proposal will be complete	only
						  PG NO 285
after  the  required number of copies of all  the  documents
mentioned  hereinbefore are supplied. The theme	 with  which
the  petitioner	 was  concerned	 and  with  which  also	 the
proposal of respondent No. 2 was concerned, was the life and
history of the great Urdu poet Mirza Ghalib. It was the case
of  the	 petitioner  that  before  the	last  date  for	 the
submission  of	the  project on 7th  May,  1986	 though	 the
petitioner  had submitted his project, respondent No. 2	 had
not.
    The High Court did not accept the aforesaid	 allegation.
We  have examined the records and the acknowledgment  sheets
in  original  which  were  produced in	the  Court  for	 our
satisfaction  and it appears to us that the High  Court	 was
right  on this point and the petitioner was not.  Respondent
No.  2 submitted, it appears, the theme of the matter  by  a
letter dated 4th February, 1986. This was not undoubtedly  a
complete  project. It was only on the theme of the  project,
namely. the life and history of the great poet Mirza Ghalib.
The petitioner, however, by a letter dated 13th March,	1986
submitted  the proposal with 13 episodes giving	 the  entire
idea  of his project depicting the life of Mirza Ghalib	 and
his  contribution  to the national  integration.  The  final
decision to award the project to respondent No. 2 was taken,
it  appears,  some time in November 1986  after	 considering
three  complete proposals on the project. It appears  to  us
from the records that the Doordarshan authorities found that
the project submitted by the petitioner was not	 "attractive
or interesting". It appears further from the letter that the
Doordarshan  authorities  did not find the proposal  of	 the
petitioner  to be "attractive or interesting" enough.  There
was one more proposal given by another person apart from the
petitioner  and respondent No. 2. It is, however, not  clear
what  that  proposal was. It appears  that  the	 Doordarshan
authorities  did not find the proposal of that person to  be
any  more  attractive  or  interesting	than  that  of	 the
petitioner. In the meantime, respondent No. 2 had  submitted
his  proposal and the Doordarshan, though the  proposal	 was
not complete, asked respondent No.2 to give further  details
and  after  they were submitted by respondent No.  2,it	 was
examined  by  the Committee. It was asserted  on  behalf  of
respondent  No. 2, and it appears to be corroborated by	 the
records	 that  before the proposal of respondent No.  2	 was
considered, the script and the proposal of the petitioner as
well  as  that of the other person were considered  and	 not
found  to be "attractive or interesting" enough.  Therefore,
it appears that though the idea was presented by  respondent
No.2  by a letter but the matter was decided only after	 the
entire	proposal had been submitted by respondent No. 2.  It
appears,  therefore,  that  all	 the  proposals	 were	duly
considered  by	the  Committee.	 It  further  appears	that
						  PG NO 286
respondent  No. 2 had submitted his proposal before his	 was
respondent  No. 2 had submitted his proposal before his	 was
accepted by the Doordarshan authorities.
    The	  conduct  of  the  Doordarshan	 in   awarding	 the
opportunity  of serialising the script to respondent  No.  2
was challenged as arbitrary and mala fide.
    It	is  well-settled that there should be  fair-play  in
action in a situation like the present one, as was  observed
by this Court in Ram & Shyam Co. v. State of Haryana & Ors.,
[1985]	3 SCC 267 at pages 268-269. It is also	well-settled
that the authorities like the Doordarshan should act  fairly
and   their  action  should  be	 legitimate  and  fair	 and
transaction  should  be	 without  any  aversion,  malice  or
affection. Nothing should be done which gives the impression
of  favouritism	 or nepotism. See the observations  of	this
Court  in  Haji	 T.M. Hassan  Rawther  v.  Kerala  Financial
Corpn., AIR 1988 SC 157 at page 161.
    While, as mentioned hereinbefore, fair-play in action in
matters	 like the present one is an  essential	requirement,
similarly,  however,  free  play in the joints'	 is  also  a
necessary concomitant for an administrative body functioning
in  an administrative sphere or quasi-administrative  sphere
as  the present one. Judged from that stand point  of  view,
though	all  the proposals might not  have  been  considered
strictly in accordance with order of precedence, it  appears
that  these were considered fairly, reasonably,	 objectively
and without any malice or ill-will.
    Respondent No. '2, it further appears. has a long record
of  steady and successful performance in direction,  script-
writing	 recognised  by the conventional  yardstick  of	 the
society.  Ii'  having  regard  to  such	 a  record,  certain
latitude  in  taking up for consideration was shown  to	 the
proposal submitted by the respondent No. 2, in our  opinion,
respondent No. 1 did not transgress the limits of  fair-play
in   action.   All   the  proposals   were,   as   mentioned
hereinbefore,  duly considered. These were considered  by  a
Committee of eminent persons. Our attention was drawn to the
names  of  the	members	 of  the  Committee.  As   mentioned
hereinbefore, the Committee did not find the proposal of the
petitioner  and	 the  other  person  either  attractive	  or
interesting  enough in awarding the TV serial on the  aspect
of  national  integration of the lifetime of  Mirza  Ghalib.
After  it  was so found, the idea of respondent	 No.  2	 was
considered  and	 the proposal was duly considered.  We	have
satisfied ourselves from the records produced at the time of
the  hearing  and from the affidavits filed before  us	that
there  was  objectivity in the actual consideration  of	 the
						  PG NO 287
different  proposals  and  that there was  fairness  in	 the
decision  and  that  no	 malice	 or  ill-will  coloured	 the
decision-making process in this case. The petitioner was not
refused	 proper consideration because what respondent No.  '
described the petitioner as one who is a 'maverick'.
    In the aforesaid light and in the facts of this case and
the principles of law that are applicable, we are  satisfied
that  the  High	 Court was right and  the  decision  of	 the
respondent  No.	 1 does not call for any  interference.	 The
Special Leave Petition must fail and is, therefore dismissed
accordingly.
Y. Lal					 Petition dismissed.




