

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
General Manager (Marketing) ... vs Subodh Chandra Das & Ors on 29 January, 1988Equivalent citations: 1988 AIR  701, 1988 SCR  (2) 862
Author: E Venkataramiah
Bench: Venkataramiah, E.S. (J)
           PETITIONER:
GENERAL MANAGER (MARKETING) HINDUSTAN FERTILIZERCORPORATION

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
SUBODH CHANDRA DAS & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT29/01/1988

BENCH:
VENKATARAMIAH, E.S. (J)
BENCH:
VENKATARAMIAH, E.S. (J)
SINGH, K.N. (J)

CITATION:
 1988 AIR  701		  1988 SCR  (2) 862
 1988 SCC  (1) 594	  JT 1988 (1)	241
 1988 SCALE  (1)234


ACT:
     Constitution of  India, 1950:  Art. 226-Power  of	High
Court-Scope of-Writ  Petition filed by employee for altering
date of	 birth-High Court held that date of birth as entered
in Service  Register  not  to  be  interfered  but  directed
reappointment of  employee for 3 years after retirement as a
special case-Whether  High Court  justified in	passing such
order.



HEADNOTE:
%
     The first	respondent, an	employee of  the  appellant-
Corporation, who was to retire from his service on 1.6.89 on
completion of  58 years	 of age	 as per	 the date  of  birth
recorded in  the register  maintained by  the employer,	 the
appellant-Corporation, filed  a writ  petition in  the	High
Court claiming	that his  date of birth should be altered to
20th October,  1938, relying  on a certificate issued by the
Chief Medical  Officer. The  petition was  contested by	 the
appellant-Corporation.
     A Single  Judge of	 the High Court held that it was not
possible to  accept the case of the first respondent that he
was born  in the  year 1938,  and that	the date of birth as
recorded in the register of the appellant-Corporation should
not be	interfered with.  However, taking into consideration
the problems  of the  respondent, domestic  or otherwise  he
made an order to the effect that the first respondent may be
given three  more  years  service  after  his  due  date  of
retirement by reappointing him for that period, as a special
case.
     Allowing the appeal,
^
     HELD: The	Single Judge  of the High Court having found
that the  date of  birth of the first respondent as recorded
in the	register of  the appellant-Corporation should not be
interfered with,  committed a  serious error  in  making  an
order directing	 the  appellant-Corporation,  as  a  special
case, to  reappoint the	 first respondent  for a  period  of
three more  years after	 his  due  date	 of  retirement,  on
1.6.89, on  the ground that he had his problems, domestic or
otherwise. There  was hardly  any justification	 for passing
such an	 order under Article 226 of the Constitution. [864B-
C]
863



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 1068 of
1987.
     From the  Judgment and Order dated 16.5.86 of the Patna
High Court in Civil Writ Jurisdiction Case No. 2523 of 1981.
     A.K. Sil and S.K. Sinha for the Appellants.
     D.N. Goburdhan for the Respondents.
     The following Order of the Court was delivered:
			    O R D E R
     The 1st  respondent-Subodh Chandra	 is  working  as  an
operator   grade-III	under	the   Hindustan	  Fertilizer
Corporation Ltd.  at Sindhri.  The date of birth recorded in
the  register	maintained  by	 the  Hindustan	  Fertilizer
Corporation Ltd. was 1.6.1931 and in the usual course he has
to retire from service on 1.6.1989 on completion of 58 years
of age. He, however, filed a writ petition in the High Court
of Patna  claiming that	 his date of birth should be altered
to 20th October, 1938. In support of his case he relied on a
certificate issued  by the  Chief Medical  Officer, Sindhri.
The petition  was  contested  by  the  Hindustan  Fertilizer
Corporation of	India Ltd. After hearing the learned counsel
for the	 parties, the  learned Judge  who heard the petition
held that  it was not possible to accept the case of the 1st
respondent that	 he was born in the year 1938 and he further
found that  the date of birth as recorded in the register of
the Corporation	 should not  be interfered with. The learned
Judge, however, passed the following order:
	  "S. Shamsul  Hasan, J.:  After the matter had been
	  heard at  great length  and legal and factual pros
	  and cons  had been  examined it  appeared that the
	  year of  the birth  of the  petitioner being	1931
	  cannot   be	 assailed   nor	  interfered   with.
	  Consequently,	 Mr.   Ojha  felt   that  since	 the
	  petitioner has  his problem domestic or otherwise-
	  and he  in 1971  was in  fact given  to understand
	  that	his  year  of  birth  would  be	 1938,	some
	  compassionate endowment may be made in his favour.
	  I am entirely in agreement with Mr. Ojha.
	       I, therefore,  dispose  of  this	 application
	  with an  expression of  my desire,  which  may  be
	  treated as  a mandate,  that the petitioner may be
	  given three more years of service as a
864
	  special case	after his  due date  of	 retirement,
	  which could  be done	by reappointing him for that
	  period. It  is made  clear that  this may  not  be
	  treated as  a precedent  for any other employee of
	  the Institution or in any other case."
     We are  of opinion that the learned Single Judge having
found that  the date  of birth	of  the	 1st  respondent  as
recorded in the register of the appellant-Corporation should
not be	interfered with, committed a serious error in making
an order  directing the	 appellant-Corporation 'as a special
case' to  reappoint the 1st respondent for a period of three
more years  after his  'due date  of retirement',  which  is
1.6.1989. There	 was hardly  any justification	for  passing
such an	 order under  Article 226  of the  Constitution. The
reason given  by the  High Court  is wholly  untenable. This
appeal filed  by the Corporation against the order passed by
the learned  Single Judge  before this Court has, therefore,
to be  allowed. We  set aside the judgment of the High Court
and dismiss  the writ  petition filed by the 1st respondent.
The appeal is disposed of accordingly. No order as to costs.
N.P.V.					     Appeal allowed.
865




