

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Jagtar Singh vs State Of Punjab & Ors on 27 January, 1988Equivalent citations: 1988 AIR  628, 1988 SCR  (2) 794
Author: B Ray
Bench: Ray, B.C. (J)
           PETITIONER:
JAGTAR SINGH

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF PUNJAB & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT27/01/1988

BENCH:
RAY, B.C. (J)
BENCH:
RAY, B.C. (J)
SHETTY, K.J. (J)

CITATION:
 1988 AIR  628		  1988 SCR  (2) 794
 1988 SCC  (1) 712	  JT 1988 (1)	200
 1988 SCALE  (1)191


ACT:
     lndian Penal  Code, 1860:	Section	 302-Accused  giving
blow with  handle of  tractor-Resulting in death of deceased
on spot-Report	of  serologist	and  chemical  examiner-Iron
handle stained with human blood-Weapon recovered pursuant to
disclosure statement  of accused-Acguittal  ordered by	High
Court set  aside-Conviction and	 sentence by  Sessions Court
confirmed.
     Criminal  Procedure  Code,	 1973:	Section	 154-FIR-Not
expected to contain all details-Effect on value of testimony
of witnesses



HEADNOTE:
%
     The accused-respondent  No. 2  in the  appeal  and	 the
deceased were  neighbours. The	prosecution alleged  that on
October 8,  1983 at about 4 P.M. the deceased along with one
of his	sons, P.W.  8 were taking their buffaloes from their
house towards  the fields. When they were moving in the lane
the accused  came from	the opposite side driving a tractor.
While the  tractor was	passing, it hit one of the buffaloes
whereupon the  deceased asked  the accused  whether he could
not see the buffaloes and there was altercation. The accused
suddenly got down from his tractor, and taking the handle of
the tractor  in his  hand gave a blow on the forehead of the
deceased. The  deceased fell  on the  ground with  his	face
downward. At  that time	 P.W.  l-appellant  in	the  Appeal,
another son  of the deceased, and P.W. 2 were coming towards
the spot  and they  saw the occurrence. The accused gave 3-4
blows on  the deceased	who was	 Iying on  the	ground,	 and
thereafter took to his heels leaving the tractor behind. The
deceased died on the spot.
     P.W. t  keeping P.W.  8 to guard the dead body, went to
the police  station which  was about 12 kms from the spot of
the occurrence,	 by bicycle,  and there lodged the FIR (Ext.
PA). The statement was recorded by the Sub-Inspector, P.W. 9
who came  to the  spot at  about 7  P.M. and made an inquest
report. The  tractor was  taken into  possession by the Sub-
Inspector,  and	 after	preparing  the	inquest	 report,  he
despatched the	dead  body  for	 autopsy.  The	accused	 was
arrested on  October  9,  1983	and  on	 the  basis  on	 his
disclosure statement  Ext. PG  the  handle  of	the  tractor
stained with blood was recovered.
795
     The accused  in a	statement under	 section 313  of the
Criminal Procedure  Code pleaded  innocence and	 stated that
due to	enmity he  had been falsely involved. The Additional
Sessions Judge	on a  consideration  and  appraisal  of	 the
evidence,  convicted  the  accused-respondent  No.  2  under
section 302  I.P.C. and sentenced him to suffer R.I. Of life
and also  pay a	 fine of  Rs.200 and  in default  to undergo
further imprisonment of two months
     The accused-respondent  No.  2  appealed  to  the	High
Court. A  Division Bench  held that  the occurrence  was not
witnessed by  P.W. 1  and P.W. 8, that the accused was named
in the	FIR because  of the  previous prolonged	 enmity, and
that it	 would be  unsafe to  rely upon	 the ocular evidence
without any  independent corroboration,	 and  acquitted	 the
accused.
     Allowing the complainant's appeal by Special Leave,
^
     HELD: 1.  An FIR  is not  expected to  contain all	 the
details.[799C-D]
     2. The  statement of  the eye  witnesses are very clear
and  straight	forward.  There	  cannot  be  any  doubt  or
possibility regarding the presence of the two eye witnesses,
PW l and PW 8 at the time of the incident. [799A-B]
     3. There is no room for doubt that the tractor was left
at the place of occurrence by the accused while running away
with the  handle of the tractor. It is also very significant
that the  handle of  the tractor  used to  give blows to the
deceased was recovered as per the recovery memo (Exhibit PG)
in pursuance of the disclosure statement made by the accused
in presence  of independent  witnesses. It  appears from the
report Exhibit	PH of  the Serologist  and Chemical Examiner
that the Iron handle was stained with human blood. [799E-F]
     4.	 The   prosecution  case   has	been  proved  beyond
reasonable doubt. The judgment and order of acquittal passed
by the	High Court is, therefore, set aside and the order of
conviction and	sentence passed	 by the	 Additional Sessions
Judge is affirmed. Non-bailable warrants be issued forthwith
for the	 arrest of  the accused-respondent No. 2, and to put
him in	jail to	 undergo the  remaining period	of sentence.
[799E-G ]



JUDGMENT:
     CRIMINAL APPELLATE	 JURISDICTION. Criminal	 Appeal	 No.
532 of 1988.
796
     From the  Judgment and  order  dated  8.1.1985  of	 the
Punjab and Haryana High Court in Crl. A. No. 302-DB of 1984.
     M.S. Gujral and Vishnu Mathur for the Appellant.
     A.K. Mulla,  R.K. Garg, R.S. Suri and N.D. Garg for the
Respondents.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     RAY, .1.  This appeal  by special	leave is against the
judgment and  order passed  by the  High Court of Punjab and
Haryana at  Chandigarh in Criminal Appeal No. 302-DB of 1984
reversing  the	 conviction  and   sentence  passed  by	 the
Additional  Sessions   Judge,  Patiala	and  acquitting	 the
appellant Paul	Singh (respondent  No. 2  in this appeal) of
the charge under section 302.
     On October	 8, 1983  at  about  4	P.M.  the  deceased,
Karnail Singh who was the next door neighbour of Paul Singh,
along with  his son  Kuldip Singh  (PW 8)  were taking their
buffaloes from	their house  towards the  fields. When	they
reached near the house of one Baldev Singh in the lane where
the houses  of Weaver community are situated, respondent No.
2, Paul Singh came from the opposite side driving a tractor.
While the  tractor was	passing, it hit one of the buffaloes
whereon Karnail	 Singh asked Paul Singh whether he could not
see the	 buffaloes. There  was some  altercation between the
parties. Paul  Singh suddenly  got  down  from	his  tractor
taking the handle of the tractor in his hand and gave a blow
on the forehead of Karnail Singh, the deceased. The deceased
fell on	 the ground  with his  face downward.  At that	time
Jagtar Singh  (PW 1),  another son  of the deceased, Karnail
Singh along  with Gurmit  Singh was  coming towards the spot
and they  saw the  occurrence. Paul  Singh gave 3-4 blows on
Karnail Singh  Iying on	 the ground and took to his heels as
Jagtar Singh  (PW 1)  and Gurmit Singh were hastening to the
spot to intervene. The tractor was left behind. The deceased
died at	 the spot  on receipt  of the injuries. Jagtar Singh
(PW 1) keeping Kuldip Singh (PW 8) and Gurmit Singh to guard
the dead  body, went  to the police station by bicycle which
is about  12 KMs  from the  place of  occurrence in  Village
Sangatpur Sodhian  and reached there at about 5.15. P.M. The
statement of  Jagtar Singh  (Exhibit PA) was recorded as FIR
by  the	 Sub-Inspector,	 Harbans  Singh	 (PW  9).  The	Sub-
Inspector and  Jagtar Singh came to the spot at about 7 P.M.
and made  an inquest  report. The  said report	(F.I.R.) was
despatched by the Sub-Inspector to Illaqa Magistrate who
797
received the  same at  about 8.15.  P.M. On October 8, 1983.
The tractor  of the  respondent No.  2, Paul Singh was taken
into possession	 by the	 Sub-Inspector vide Memo Exhibit PL.
After preparing	 the inquest  report (Exhibit  PE), the Sub-
Inspector despatched  the dead	body of	 Karnail  Singh	 for
autopsy. The  respondent No.  2 was  arrested on  October 9,
1983 and  on the  basis of his disclosure statement (Exhibit
PG) the	 handle of  the tractor	 (Exhibit PF)  stained	with
blood was  recovered by	 the Sub-Inspector. Respondent No. 2
in his	statement under	 Section 313  of  Code	of  Criminal
Procedure pleaded  his innocence  and  stated  that  due  to
enmity he has been falsely involved in this case.
     The learned Additional Sessions Judge after hearing the
counsel for the parties and on a consideration and appraisal
of the evidences on record, convicted the accused Paul Singh
under section  302 I.P.C.  and sentenced  him to suffer R.I.
for life and also pay a fine of Rs.200 in default of payment
of fine	 to undergo  further R.I.  for 2 months. It was also
ordered that  the period  of detention	already undergone by
him during  the investigation,	inquiry or  trial  would  be
allowed to  be set off under section 428 of Code of Criminal
Procedure.
     Against this judgment and order the accused, Paul Singh
filed an  appeal being Criminal Appeal No. 302-DB of 1984 in
the High Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh. The said
appeal was  heard by  a division bench of the High Court and
without properly  considering and  marshalling the evidences
of the	eye-witnesses, Jagtar  Singh (PW 1) and Kuldip Singh
(PW 8)	as well as the FIR (Exhibit PA) and also the Inquest
Report (Exhibit	 PE) and  other evidences on record, wrongly
held that  the occurrence  was not witnessed by Jagtar Singh
and Kuldip  Singh and  Paul Singh,  respondent No. 2 in this
appeal	was  named  in	the  FIR  because  of  the  previous
prolonged enmity with him. It was also held that it would be
unsafe	to   rely  upon	 the  ocular  evidence	without	 any
independent corroboration and acquitted the respondent No. 2
setting aside  the conviction  and sentence  awarded by	 the
Additional Sessions Judge.
     The incident  occurred on	October 8,  1983 at  about 4
P.M. and  the FIR  was lodged  by Jagtar Singh (PW 1) who is
the son	 of the	 deceased, Karnail  Singh at  Police Station
Moolepur which is at a distance of 12 KMs. from the place of
occurrence in  Village Sangatpur  Sodhian at about 5.15 P.M.
In the FIR (Exhibit PA) it has been stated by the informant,
Jagtar Singh  (PW 1)  that he  and his brother, Kuldip Singh
(PW 8) and one Gurmit Singh were present at the place of H
798
occurrence and	witnessed the  assault by  the accused, Paul
Singh with  the handle	of  the	 tractor  on  the  deceased,
Karnail Singh  over an	altercation as	to the	striking the
tractor against	 one of	 the buffaloes	of the	deceased. It
also appears  that in  the FIR	it has	been stated that the
accused gave  a blow  with the	handle of the tractor to the
father of  the informant  hitting his  forehead towards	 the
left and  he also  gave 3-4  blows with the handle while the
deceased fell  down on	the ground  with his  face  downward
hitting his  head. He  and Gurmit  Singh were  hastening  to
intervene when	the accused fled away with the handle. It is
also evident  from the	Inquest Report (Exhibit PE) prepared
by the Sub-Inspector (PW 9) on the date of the incident that
he found  amongst other articles one tractor-Escorts bearing
registration No.  PUC 5206 which he sealed vide Memo Exhibit
PL. Admittedly,	 there was  longstanding enmity	 between the
accused and  the deceased.  The accused	 filed papers  which
were exhibited	in the	case showing  that several  criminal
cases were  filed between the parties and this long-standing
enmity between the parties was the motive on the part of the
accused to  inflict injuries  on the deceased, Karnail Singh
and the	 immediate motive  was	the  altercation  which	 the
deceased had  with the	accused	 when  the  tractor  of	 the
accused struck one of the buffaloes of the deceased.
     It has  been urged on behalf of the respondents that in
the FIR	 (Exhibit PA)  it was merely stated that the accused
gave one  handle blow  on the forehead of the deceased. Then
the deceased fell down and the accused gave 3-4 handle blows
to the	deceased whereas  in his deposition before the Court
the informant  made the	 improvement by	 stating that out of
the 3-4	 handle blows  one hit	him on the right side of the
forehead, one  on the back of the left side of the head, one
on the	back of	 the right  side of  the head and one on the
back of the head. It  has also been urged that in the FIR it
was not	 stated that  Jagtar Singh,  PW 1  and Gurmit  Singh
tried to  intervene when the accused was giving blows to the
deceased with  the  handle.  It	 was  therefore	 urged	that
because of these improvements, the prosecution story as made
out in	the FIR	 was doubtful. It was further submitted that
in the FIR it was not stated that the accused left the place
leaving the  tractor at	 the place  of occurrence though the
FIR stated  in detail  about the occurrence. This submission
cannot be  sustained as it is evident from the FIR which was
lodged with  utmost promptitude that PW 1 had stated therein
that 'he  and Gurmit  Singh went  ahead in order to separate
him'. As regards the statement in his evidence regarding the
3-4 blows  made with  the handle of the tractor it cannot be
said to be an improve-
     ment but  it  merely  explains  the  places  where	 the
assault was made on
799
the body  of the  deceased. On this basis, it cannot be said
that there  wasan improvement made on what was stated in the
FIR. The statements of the eye witnesses cannot be discarded
on this	 score. The  statements of  the witnesses  are	very
clear and  straight forward.  There cannot  be any  doubt or
possibility regarding  the presence of the two eye witnesses
PW 1 and PW 8 at the time of the incident.
     On a  careful appraisal  of the  evidences of these two
eye witnesses  we cannot  but hold that they were present at
the place  of occurrence  and witnessed the entire incident.
It appears  from the post mortem report also that that there
were six  injuries on  the person  of the deceased and these
injuries according  to the  opinion of the Doctor, PW 2 were
sufficient to cause death in the ordinary course of nature.
     The appellate  court held	that  the  recovery  of	 the
tractor was of no help to the prosecution case as in the FIR
it was	not mentioned  that the accused had left the tractor
at the spot. FIR is not expected to contain all the details.
This finding  of the  appellate court is wholly erroneous in
as much	 as it	is evident  from the inquest report (Exhibit
PE) made  on the  date of  occurrence i.e.  October 8, 1983,
that the  tractor was  seized on that date from the place of
occurrence vide	 recovery memo	No. PL by the Sub-Inspector,
Harbans Singh,	PW 9.  There is therefore, no room for doubt
that the  tractor was left at the place of occurrence by the
accused while  running away  with the handle of the tractor.
It is  also very  significant to note that the handle of the
tractor used  to give blows to the deceased was recovered as
per the	 recovery memo	(Exhibit PG)  in  pursuance  of	 the
disclosure statement  made by  the accused  in	presence  of
independent witnesses,	Nirmal Singh  and Jarnail  Singh. It
appears	 from  the  report  Exhibit  PH	 of  Serologist	 and
Chemical Examiner  that Iron  handle was  stained with human
blood.
     In	 view	of  the	  reasons  stated  hereinbefore	 the
prosecution case  his been  proved beyond  reasonable doubt.
The judgment and order of acquittal passed by the High Court
is therefore,  set aside  and the  order of  conviction	 and
sentence passed	 by the learned Additional Sessions Judge is
hereby affirmed.  Let non-bailable  warrants issue forthwith
for the	 arrest of the accused, Paul Singh, respondent No. 2
and to	put him	 in jail  to undergo the remaining period of
sentence.
N.V.K.					     Appeal allowed.
800




