

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
T.J. Stephen & Ors vs Parle Bottling Co.(P) Ltd. & Ors on 22 March, 1988Equivalent citations: 1988 AIR  994, 1988 SCR  (3) 296
Author: M Rangnath
Bench: Misra Rangnath
           PETITIONER:
T.J. STEPHEN & ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
PARLE BOTTLING CO.(P) LTD. & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT22/03/1988

BENCH:
MISRA RANGNATH
BENCH:
MISRA RANGNATH
DUTT, M.M. (J)

CITATION:
 1988 AIR  994		  1988 SCR  (3) 296
 1988 SCC  Supl.  458	  JT 1988 (1)	606
 1988 SCALE  (1)562
 CITATOR INFO :
 E	    1992 SC1701	 (38)


ACT:
     lmports and  Exports (Control)  Act, 1947:	 Section  5-
Prosecution of Company and its Managing Director-Examination
of complainant,	 the Deputy  Chief Controller of Imports and
Exports-Whether necessary-Whether  complaint can  be quashed
by referring to records of investigation.
     Criminal Procedure	 Code, 1973: Section 200 Prosecution
of Company  and its Managing Director under section 5 of the
Imports	 and  Exports  (Control)  Act,	1947-Examination  of
complainant-Whether necessary and relevant.



HEADNOTE:
%
     A	complaint   filed  in	the  court   of	 the   Chief
Metropolitan Magistrate	 by the	 appellant, Chief Controller
of Imports  and Exports, against respondents Nos. 1 and 2, a
private limited	 company and  its Managing  Director for the
alleged commission  of an  offence under s. 5 of the Imports
and Exports (Control) Act, 1947 was subsequently transferred
to another  court and  cognizance of the offence alleged was
taken without  examining the  appellant as proviso (a) of s.
200 of the Code of Criminal Procedure was applicable to this
complaint.
     An application  filed by the accused persons for recall
of summons  and dismissal  of complaint was dismissed by the
trial Magistrate.  An appeal against the aforesaid order was
dismissed by  the High	Court. A  special leave	 application
filed against  the High	 Court's order	was dismissed by the
Supreme Court.
     An	 application   made  at	 the  trial  stage  for	 the
discharge of  respondent No. 2, the Managing Director on the
plea that there was no allegation of any criminal misconduct
against him and the Company-respondent No. 1 was prepared to
admit its  guilt and  may be  appropriately  penalised,	 was
dismissed by the trial court.
     On appeal,	 the High  Court quashed  the process issued
against respondent  No. 2  on the  ground that	the order of
issuance of process
297
was clearly  as a  result of  non-application of mind by the
trial Judge  because when the process was issued against the
petitioners, the Department and the State had merely filed a
complaint case	along with  list of witnesses and documents,
and none  of  the  statements  of  witnesses  or  copies  of
documents was  produced before	the trial  Judge,  and	that
respondent No.	2 could	 not be prosecuted under s. 5 of the
Act, as	 the prosecution intended to charge him as principal
offender alongwith  respondent No.  1 the  Company and there
were no	 allegations in	 the complaint that respondent No. 2
either aided  or abetted in the contravention of the licence
conditions by respondent No. 1 Company.
     Allowing the Department's appeal,
^
     HELD: 1.1	The High  Court had  not cared	to look into
procedural law	applicable to  the factual  situation before
it. If a reference had been made to section 200, Proviso (a)
of Code	 of  Criminal  Procedure,  the	proceedings  against
respondent No. 2 could not have been quashed. [299G-H]
     1.2 Records  of investigation  are not  evidence in the
instant case,  and a  complaint	 could	not  be	 quashed  by
referring to  the investigation	 records, particularly	when
the petition of the complainant did allege facts which prima
facie show commission of an offence. [300B]
     The  High	 Court	overlooked  the	 fact  that  similar
objections raised  earlier were	 rejected by  the same	High
Court, and  this decision  was upheld  by the Supreme Court,
and drew a distinction between the two situations, by saying
that records  of investigation	were not  available  on	 the
earlier occasion. [300A-B]
     1.3 The  licensee was a company and a company by itself
could not  act, and  has to act through someone. Since there
was  clear   allegation	 that	the  Managing  Director	 had
committed the  offence, acting	on behalf  of the  licensee,
there was  no justification  for  quashing  the	 proceedings
against respondent No. 2. [300C]
     Order of  the High Court is vacated. However, since the
offence was  committed 20 years back, it would not be in the
interest of  justice to allow a prosecution to start and the
trial to be proceeded with at this belated stage even though
respondent No.	2 has  no equity in his favour and the delay
has been  mostly on account of his mala fide move. Hence the
case against  respondent No.  2 is  directed  to  be  closed
forthwith. [300E,G]



JUDGMENT:
     CRIMINAL APPELLATE	 JURISDICTION: Criminal	 Appeal	 No.
175 of 1988.
298
     From the  Judgment and  order dated 10.2.86 in the High
Court of Bombay in Crl. Writ Petition No. 295 of 1986.
     Kuldeep Singh,  Solicitor General,	 Ms. A.	 Subhashini,
Mrs. Sushma Suri and B. Parthasarthy for the Appellants.
      C.L. Sareen, O.K. Khuller, R.C. Kohli and Mrs. H. Wahi
for the Respondents.
      The following order of the Court was delivered:
			 O R D E R
     Special leave granted.
     This appeal  is by	 special leave. The appellant who is
Deputy Chief  Controller of  Imports  and  Exports  filed  a
complaint in  the Court	 of Chief  Metropolitan	 Magistrate,
Bombay alleging commission of offence under Section 5 of the
Imports and Exports (Control) Act, 1947 by the respondents 1
and 2.	The said  case got  transferred to  the Court of the
Additional  Chief   Metropolitan  Magistrate,	38th  Court,
Ballard Estate, Bombay and was numbered as 82/S of 1983. The
respondent No.	1 is  a private	 limited  company  with	 its
registered office  at Bombay and the respondent No. 2 is its
Managing Director.  To this complaint proviso (a) of Section
200 of	the  Code  of  Criminal	 Procedure  was	 applicable.
Therefore, cognizance  was  taken  of  the  offence  alleged
without	 examining   the   appellant.	On   17.1.1983,	  an
application was	 filed on  behalf of the two accused persons
for recall  of the summonses and dismissal of the complaint.
On 12th	 of May	 1983, the  learned Magistrate dismissed the
petition. The  order of	 the learned magistrate was assailed
before the  High Court	and  on	 2.9.1983,  the	 High  Court
dismissed it.  Then the	 matter was brought to this Court by
filing an  application for special leave on 12.12.1983, this
Court dismissed the leave application. The case set down for
trial after  charges were framed. An application was made to
the trial  court at  this stage	 to discharge  the  Managing
Director, Respondent No. 2 in exercise of inherent powers by
contending that	 the company was prepared to admit its guilt
and may be appropriately penalised and the Managing Director
against whom there was no allegation of any criminal conduct
should be  discharged. The  learned Magistrate by a reasoned
order dated  17th February,  1986, dismissed the application
and directed  that the	trial should  proceed against  both.
That order was assailed by the respondents before the Bombay
High Court by filing a criminal writ
299
petition. The High Court by its order dated 10th July, 1986,
which is impugned in this appeal, held:
	  "On perusal  of the  averments it  is seen that at
	  the time  the learned Trial Judge issued/processed
	  against the  petitioners accused,  the  Department
	  and the  State had  merely filed  a complaint case
	  along with  list of  witnesses and documents. None
	  of  the  statements  of  witnesses  or  copies  of
	  documents were  produced before  the Trial  Judge.
	  The complainant's  verification statement  is also
	  not recorded.	 As such  the order  of issuance  of
	  process is  clearly a result of non-application of
	  mind by  the trial  Judge. Such  order would	mean
	  that merely  on filing  a  complaint	the  process
	  could be issued. It would be unjust to the accused
	  if process is issued against him by the Magistrate
	  without first	 satisfying himself about the nature
	  of the  case and  whether there  exists sufficient
	  grounds for  proceeding with	the case. Since this
	  is not  done, then in the instant case the process
	  issued  against   petitioner	 No.   2   (Managing
	  Director) is	liable to  be quashed on this ground
	  alone. Without  short circuiting the other grounds
	  it  must  be	pointed	 out  that  perusal  of	 the
	  complaint  and   in  particular  page	 23  of	 the
	  complaint shows  that the  prosecution intends  to
	  charge petitioner  No. 2 as the principal offender
	  along with  the petitioner  No. 1-company. That is
	  not possible	for the	 simple reason	that offence
	  under	 Section   5  of  the  Imports	and  Exports
	  (Control) Act	 is done Principally by the licencee
	  (Company in  this case)  and/or by  the abetter to
	  the offence.	There  are  no	allegations  in	 the
	  complaint that  the petitioner  No. 2 either aided
	  or  abetted	in  the	  contravention	 of  licence
	  conditions by	 the petitioner	 No.  1-Company.  As
	  such	on  this  ground  also	the  process  issued
	  against petitioner  No. 2  is liable	to be and is
	  quashed and set aside."
The criticism  advanced by  the learned	 Judge	against	 the
trying	Magistrate   is	 wholly	 untenable  and	 is  perhaps
applicable to  the learned Judge. If reference had been made
to  Section   200  Proviso  (a)	 of  the  Code	of  Criminal
Procedure, what	 has been  advanced as	the most  impressive
ground for  quashing the  proceedings against the respondent
No. 2 could not at all have been accepted. The learned Judge
obviously has  not cared  to look  into the  procedural	 law
applicable to  the factual situation before him. The learned
Judge also  lost sight	of the	fact that similar objections
had once been raised and his High
300
Court had refused to entertain the same and the order of the
High Court  had been  upheld here  by dismissing the special
leave petition. The portion we have extracted from the order
of the High Court suggested that the learned Judge wanted to
draw a	distinction between  then and now by saying that the
records	 of  investigation  had	 not  then  been  available.
Records of investigation are not evidence in this case and a
complaint  could   not	be   quashed  by  referring  to	 the
investigation records  particularly when the petition of the
complainant  did   allege  facts   which  prima	 facie	show
commission of  an offence.  The learned	 Judge did  note the
fact that  the licencee	 was a company but lost sight of the
fact that  a company  by itself could not act. Obviously the
Company has  to act through some one. In the petition of the
complainant there  was clear  allegation that  the  Managing
Director had  committed the  offence acting on behalf of the
licencee. If  the complainant's	 petition had  been properly
scrutinized the second ground advanced in the impugned order
for quashing  the proceedings  against the Managing Director
could not have been utilised in the impugned order. Both the
grounds are  wholly untenable  and, therefore,	the order of
the High  Court has  got to be reversed. We allow the appeal
and vacate the order of the High Court.
     Once the  order of	 the High Court is vacated the order
of the	learned Magistrate  would revive and the prosecution
as directed  by the  learned Magistrate has now to continue.
The petition of the complainant at page 21 of the paper-book
shows that  the offence	 was committed between 1967 and 1969
which is  some 20  years back. While we have no sympathy for
the respondent	No. 2 and we are clearly of the opinion that
he has	no equity  in his  favour and  the delay  after	 the
complaint had  been filed  has been mostly on account of his
mala fide  move, we do not think it would be in the interest
of justice  to allow  a prosecution  to start 20 years after
the offence  has been  committed. If  we could	convict	 the
respondent No.	2 in accordance with law, we would have been
prepared to  do so  taking the facts of the case and conduct
of the	respondent into	 consideration but that would not be
possible within	 the framework	of the law of procedure. We,
therefore, do not propose to allow the learned Magistrate to
proceed with the trial of the case at this belated stage.
     We accordingly  direct the	 case to  be closed  against
respondent No.	2 without  further delay.  Ordinarily, in  a
criminal case  of this	type there  would have been no order
for costs.  But keeping	 in view the background of the case,
the manner in which the respondent No. 2 has behaved and the
fact that he is squarely responsible for delaying the
301
proceedings by	reiterating the	 same contention twice over.
We are	of A  the definite opinion that the respondent No. 2
should be  made to  suffer exemplary  costs. We	 accordingly
direct that  he shall  be called  upon to  pay a  sum of Rs.
10,000 by  way of  costs  and  the  said  amount  is  to  be
deposited in  the trial court within one month hence failing
which the  trial court shall have a direction to recover the
same  as  fine	and  pay  the  amount  to  the	complainant.
Compliance shall be reported to the Registry of this Court.
N.P.V.
302
