

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Collector Of Central Excise, ... vs Kutty Flush Doors & Furniture Co. ... on 28 March, 1988Equivalent citations: 1988 AIR 1164, 1988 SCR  (3) 363
Author: S Mukharji
Bench: Mukharji, Sabyasachi (J)
           PETITIONER:
COLLECTOR OF CENTRAL EXCISE, MADRAS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
KUTTY FLUSH DOORS & FURNITURE CO. (P) LTD.

DATE OF JUDGMENT28/03/1988

BENCH:
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)
BENCH:
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)
RANGNATHAN, S.

CITATION:
 1988 AIR 1164		  1988 SCR  (3) 363
 1988 SCC  Supl.  239	  JT 1988 (2)	 93
 1988 SCALE  (1)705


ACT:
     Central Excises  and Salt	Act, 1944:  Section 35L	 and
Tariff Item  No. 68-Timber  logs sawn into sizes-Whether new
product	 emerges-Whether  excise  duty	becomes	 chargeable-
Concept of 'manufacture'-What is.
     Words and Phrases: 'Manufacture'-Meaning of.



HEADNOTE:
%
     The respondent  firm filed a classification list before
the Assistant  Collector, Excise,  and sought  approval	 for
treating sawn  timber and  dried timber	 as non-excisable on
the ground  that sawing	 of timber  logs into  sizes did not
amount to  manufacture. The  Assistant Collector  held	that
conversion of the timber logs into sawn timber satisfied the
conditions of  manufacture since it involved transformation,
whereby a  new and different article with the distinct name,
character or  use, which was different from the timber logs,
emerged, and,  therefore, excise  duty	was  leviable  under
Tariff Item  68. On appeal, the Collector concurred with the
Assistant Collector.  Allowing the appeal of the respondent,
the Customs,  Excise and  Gold (Control)  Appellate Tribunal
held that  no new  product emerged  by sawing of timber into
several sizes. Hence the appeal by the Revenue under Section
35(L) of the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944.
     Dismissing the appeal by the State,
^
     HELD: 1.1	Excise duty  becomes chargeable	 only when a
new and	 different article  emerges having  a distinct name,
character and use. This is a question of fact depending upon
the relevant  material whether,	 as a  result of activity, a
new and	 different article  emerges having  a distinct name,
character and use. [365B-D]
     1.2 'Manufacture' implies a change, but every change is
not manufacture	 and yet  every change	of an article is the
result of  treatment, labour and manipulation. But something
more was  necessary and	 there must be transformation; a new
and different  article must  emerge having  a distinct name,
character or use. [365E-F]
364
     Having regard to the facts of the case, as found by the
Tribunal which	was the	 final fact  finding  authority	 and
regard being  had to  the  principles  for  determining	 the
questions which	 were correctly applied by the Tribunal, the
conclusion of  the Tribunal  that no  new product emerged by
sawing of  timber into several sizes is unassailable. [365F-
G]
     Union of  India v.	 Delhi Cloth General Mills, [1963] 1
Suppl.	SCR   586;  Allenburry	 Engineers  Pvt.   Ltd.	  v.
Ramakrishna Dalmia  & Ors.,  [1973] 2  SCR 257	and State of
Orissa &  Ors. v.  The Titaghur Paper Mills Co. Ltd. & Anr.,
[1985] 3 SCR 26, referred to.



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Civil  Appeal No. 468 of
1988.
     From the Order dated 7.7.1987 of the Customs Excise and
Gold (Control)	Appellate Tribunal,  New Delhi in Appeal No.
383/83-D.
     G. Ramaswami,  Additional Solicitor  General, Ms.	Indu
Malhotra and Mrs. Sushma Suri, for the Appellant.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     SABYASACHI MUKHARJI, J. This is an appeal under Section
35L(b) of the Central Excise and Salt Act, 1944 (hereinafter
called 'the  Act'). The appeal is directed against the Order
of the	Customs Excise and Gold (Control) Appellate Tribunal
(hereinafter called 'the CEGAT').
     The respondent  herein filed  a classification  list on
16th March,  1982 seeking  approval of Sawn timber and dried
timber as  non-excisable. The  submission of  the respondent
was that timber logs were only sawn into sizes and these did
not tantamount	to any	manufacture. However,  the Assistant
Collector, Madras,  held that  the conversion of timber logs
into sawn  timber satisfied  the conditions  of	 manufacture
insofar as  the conversion  of timber  logs into sawn timber
involves transformation	 whereby a new and different article
with the  distinct name,  character or	use emerges which is
different from	timber logs.  It was  held accordingly	that
excise duty  @ 8%  ad valorem  under Tariff  Item 68  of the
erstwhile Central Excise Tariff was leviable.
     The respondent  filed an appeal before the Collector of
Appeals who concurred with the Assistant Collector upholding
the duty.  Aggrieved thereby  the respondent filed an appeal
before the CEGAT.
365
The Tribunal  in the  Judgment under  appeal, relied  on its
decision in  the case of Sanghvi Enterprises, Jammu, Tawi v.
Collector of  Central Excise, Chandigarh, [1984] Vol. 16 ELT
317 and	 the Karnataka	High Court in the case of Y. Moideen
Kunhi &	 Ors. v.  Collector of	Central Excise,	 Bangalore &
Ors., [1986] Vol. 23 ELT 293 and came to the conclusion that
no new	product emerges	 by sawing  of timber  into  several
sizes. In  the premises	 the Tribunal  allowed the appeal of
the respondent. Hence, this appeal.
     It is  well-settled that excise-duty becomes chargeable
only when  a new  and different	 article  emerges  having  a
distinct name, character and use. See in this connection the
observations of	 this Court in Union of India v. Delhi Cloth
& General  Mills, [1963]  1 Suppl.  SCR 586  and South Bihar
Sugar Mills  Ltd. etc.	v. Union  of India Ors. [1968] 3 SCR
21. This  principle is	well-settled. This  is a question of
fact depending	upon the  relevant  material  whether  as  a
result of  activity, a	new and	 different  article  emerges
having a  distinct name,  character  and  use.	The  use  of
expression  'manufacture'  was	explained  in  the  case  of
Allenburry Engineers Pvt. Ltd. v. Ramakrishna Dalmia & Ors.,
[1973] 2  SCR 257. In State of Orissa & Ors. v. The Titaghur
Paper Mills  Co. Ltd.  & Anr.,	[1985] 3  SCR 26 which was a
decision on  the Orissa	 Sales Tax  Act, this  question	 was
considered in the background of the fact whether planks, cut
into sizes, etc., sawed out of logs, are different from logs
in its nascent state.
     It may be worthwhile to note that 'manufacture' implies
a change,  but every change is not manufacture and yet every
change of  an article is the result of treatment, labour and
manipulation. But  something more  was necessary  and  there
must be	 transformation; a  new and  different article	must
emerge having  a distinct  name, character or use. See Union
of India  v. Delhi  Cloth Mills	 (supra) at  page 596 of the
report. Having regard to the facts found in this case by the
Tribunal,  which   ultimately  is  the	final  fact  finding
authority, we  are of  the opinion  that regard being had to
the principles	for determining	 the  questions	 which	were
correctly applied  in the  decision of	the Tribunal, in the
facts of  this case,  the  conclusion  of  the	Tribunal  is
unassailable.
     In the  premises there  is no  merit in this appeal and
the same is accordingly dismissed.
N.P.V.					   Appeal dismissed.
366




