

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Mohan Lal vs Jai Bhagwan on 23 March, 1988Equivalent citations: 1988 AIR 1034, 1988 SCR  (3) 345
Author: S Mukharji
Bench: Mukharji, Sabyasachi (J)
           PETITIONER:
MOHAN LAL

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
JAI BHAGWAN

DATE OF JUDGMENT23/03/1988

BENCH:
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)
BENCH:
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)
RANGNATHAN, S.

CITATION:
 1988 AIR 1034		  1988 SCR  (3) 345
 1988 SCC  (2) 474	  JT 1988 (2)	 61
 1988 SCALE  (1)675
 CITATOR INFO :
 RF	    1989 SC1841	 (5)


ACT:
     Haryana Urban  (Control of	 Rent &	 Eviction) Act, 1973
Section 13(2)(ii)(b)-Tenant-Eviction  of-Use of building for
purpose other than for which leased.
     Landlord-Renting out  shop-Tenant-To  run	business  of
English Liquor	Vend-Do sale  of liquor-Liquor	licence	 not
renewed-Tenant doing business of general merchandise-Whether
change in user.
     Statutory	  Interpretation:     Statutes-Words	 and
expressions-Meaning must be found in the felt necessities of
the time.



HEADNOTE:
%
     The appellant-tenant  took on  rent the  suit  premises
from the respondent-landlord on a monthly rent of Rs.120 and
executed a  rent note  in his  favour on  19th April,  1975.
Clause 4  of the  rent note  provided that the tenant was to
run the	 'business of  English Liquor  Vend, and  do sale of
liquor in the shop.'
     The respondent  filed a  petition	for  eviction  under
section 13 of the Haryana Urban (Control of Rent & Eviction)
Act, 1973  against the	appellant on the ground of ground of
rent from 1st April, 1979 to 31st August, 1979 and change of
user  from   liquor  vend   business  to   that	 of  general
merchandise.
     The appellant  tendered the  entire arrears  of rent at
the first  date	 of  hearing,  and  contested  the  eviction
petition by filing a written statement contending that after
March, 1979 the licence of liquor-vend in his favour was not
renewed, and he had to discontinue that business at the suit
premises,  and	 had  to   start  the  business	 of  general
merchandise. It	 was, further, contended that the purpose of
user still  remained commercial and that there was no clause
in the	rent note prohibiting the appellant to change to any
other business.
     The Rent Controller held that the appellant had changed
the user  of the  shop in dispute and that he was liable for
eviction under the Act.
346
     The Appellate  Authority dismissed the appeal. The High
Court also dismissed the Civil Revision and upheld the order
of eviction.
     Allowing the Appeal, this Court,
^
     HELD: 1.  The business purposes must be adjudged in the
light of  the purposes	of the Rent Act in question which is
to control the eviction of tenants therefrom. [349C]
     2. In  the expanding  concept of  business nowadays and
the growing  concept of	 departmental stores,  it cannot  be
said that  there was any change of user in the instant case,
when the  tenant converted  the use  of	 the  building	from
liquor vend  business to  that of  general merchandise.	 The
building was  rented  for  the	purpose	 of  carrying  on  a
business. It  was used	for another business which would not
in any way impair the utility or damage to the building, and
the business  could be	conveniently carried  on in the said
premises. No  nuisance was  also created.  The	case  would,
therefore, not	attract the  mischief  of  s.  13(2)(ii)(b).
[349D, 350E]
     3. So  far as the High Court of Punjab and Haryana held
in the	Full Bench  decision in	 Sikander Lal  v. Amrit Lal,
(1984 Punjab  Law Reporter 1) that allied business would not
amount to  change of  user but	for a  business which is not
allied for  the business  for which  it was  let  out  would
amount to  change of user come within the mischief of clause
(b) of	section 13(2)(ii)  of the Act, the same must be read
with reservation. [348H, 349A]
     4. When  Parliament legislates  to remedy a defect or a
lacuna in  the existing	 law, and  the judiciary  interprets
them, it  has to  be borne  in mind  that the  meaning of an
expression must	 be found  in the  felt necessities of time.
[349G-H, 350C-D]
     Duport Steels  Ltd. & others v. Sirs and others, [1980]
1 All.E.R. 529 at 541. referred to.



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Civil  Appeal No.  50 of
1988.
      From  the Judgment  and order  dated  14.8.87  of	 the
Punjab &  Haryana High	Court in  Civil Revision No. 2836 of
1982.
      Dr. Meera Aggarwal for the Petitioner.
347
     A.B. Rohtagi,  Mukul Rohtagi,  Atul Tewari and Ms. Bina
Gupta for the Respondent.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     SABYASACHI MUKHARJI, J. This appeal by special leave is
directed against  the judgment	of the	High Court of Punjab
and Haryana  dated 14th	 August, 1987. The appellant took on
rent the  premises in  dispute	from  the  respondent  at  a
monthly rent  of Rs.  120 and  executed a  rent note  in his
favour on  19th April,	1975. Clause 4 of the said rent note
provided, inter alia, as follows:
	  "That the  tenant will run the business of English
	  Liquor Vend in the shop-will do sale of Liquor."
     The landlord,  respondent herein filed a petition under
section 13 of the Haryana Urban (Control of Rent & Eviction)
Act,  1973   (hereinafter  called  'the	 Act')	against	 the
appellant on  the ground of arrears of rent from 1.4.1979 to
31.8.1979 and  change of  user from  Liquor Vend business to
that of	 general merchandise  at the  shop in dispute by the
appellant.
     The appellant  tendered the  entire arrears  of rent at
the first  date of  hearing and	 thereafter he	contested by
filing written statement. The appellant submitted that after
March, 1979,  the licence  of liquor-vend  in his favour was
not renewed  and he  had to  discontinue  that	business  of
liquor-vend at	the shop  in dispute  and had  to start	 the
business of  general merchandise. According to the appellant
the purpose of the user still remains commercial and that in
the rent  note there was no clause prohibiting the appellant
to change any other business in the shop in dispute.
     The Rent Controller held that the appellant had changed
the user  of the  shop in  dispute and	he  was	 liable	 for
eviction under the Act. There was an appeal to the Appellate
Authority and  the Appellate  Authority dismissed  the	said
appeal. The  appellant went  in civil  revision to  the High
Court of  Punjab and  Haryana. The  High Court dismissed the
civil revision and upheld the eviction. Hence this appeal.
     The question is, whether a ground for eviction was made
out under  clause (b)  of section  13(2)(ii) of the Act. The
said Act  was passed  to control  the increase	of  rent  of
certain buildings and rented land situated within the limits
of urban areas, and the eviction of the
348
tenants therefrom.  Section 13(2)(ii)(b) of the Act reads as
follows:
	  "13(2) A  landlord who  seeks to  evict his tenant
	  shall apply  to the  Controller, for	direction in
	  that behalf.	If the	Controller, after giving the
	  tenant a  reasonable opportunity  of showing cause
	  against the application is satisfied:
	  (i) XX	 XX	   XX
	  (ii) that  the tenant	 has after  commencement  of
	  1949 Act,  without  the  written  consent  of	 the
	  landlord
	  (a) XX	 XX	   XX
	  (b) used the building or rented land for a purpose
	  other than that for which it was leased."
     The High  Court of	 Punjab and  Haryana has relied on a
Full Bench  decision of	 the said High Court in Sikander Lal
v. Amrit  Lal, [1984] Punjab Law Reporter 1. That was a case
under the  East Punjab	Urban Rent  Restriction Act of 1949.
The Full  Bench of  the Punjab and Haryana High Court in the
facts and  circumstances of  that case	held that  it was  a
common ground  that the	 premises was  originally leased for
the business  of handlooms. Thereafter it was used for small
carding machine	 not occupying a space of more than 4 feet x
4 feet	which converted	 cloth into thread. It was held that
there was  no change  of  user.	 The  Full  Bench,  however,
observed that  it emerged  from the long line of authorities
that where  the subsequent  use of  the premises  is  merely
ancillary to  the specific  original purpose  then it  would
imply no  change of  user within the meaning of the statute.
If by custom or convention or on the finding of the Court it
could be  held that  the  added	 use  of  the  premises	 was
ancillary to  the main	original purpose  then in the eye of
law it	would be deemed to have been within the terms of the
original lease.	 It was	 further held that both on principle
and on	binding precedent  it  emerged	that  the  specified
original purpose  could not be, according to the Full Bench,
extended by  adding to it any and every purpose thereto, and
the same  must be  confined within  the limitation  of being
either a  part or  parcel of,  or ancillary to, the original
purpose.  There	  the  Court   was  concerned  with  section
13(2)(ii)(b) of	 the Act  which is an identical provision as
the present  one. So far as the High Court held in that case
that allied  business would not amount to change of user but
for a  business which  is not  allied for  the business	 for
which it was let out would amount to change
349
of user	 come within  the mischief  of clause (b) of section
13(2)(ii)  of	the  Act,   the	 same	must  be  read	with
reservation.
     Our attention  was drawn to a decision of this Court in
Maharaj Kishan	Kesar v.  Milkha Singh	and  others,  (Civil
Appeal No.  1086 of  1964 decided on 10th of November, 1965.
That was  a  decision  under  the  East	 Punjab	 Urban	Rent
Restriction Act,  1949. There  on the  facts the Court found
that selling  petrol was  an allied business of the workshop
and as	such it	 is a  part of	the business. The Court held
that there is no evidence to show that in the trade a petrol
pump is	 not regarded  as a part of motor workshop business.
The sale  of petrol  is an  allied business  and  would	 not
amount to  conversion to  a different  business or change of
user. There is nothing in the said decision which would give
any assistance	to the respondent in this case. The business
purposes must  be adjudged  in the  light of the purposes of
the Rent Act in question which is to control the eviction of
tenants therefrom.  In the  expanding  concept	of  business
now-a-days and	the growing  concept of departmental stores,
we are	of the opinion that it cannot be said that there was
any change  of user  in the  facts of  this case which would
attract	 the   mischief	 of   the  provisions	of   section
13(2)(ii)(b) of the Act. The building was rented for purpose
of carrying on a business, using it for another business, it
will not  in any  way  impair  the  utility  or	 damage	 the
building and this business can be conveniently carried on in
the said premises. There was no nuisance created.
     Our attention  was drawn  to the  observations of	Lord
Diplock in Duport Steels Ltd. and others v. Sirs and others,
[1980] 1 All.E.R. 529 at 541. That was a decision in respect
of the Trade Disputes Act 1906. Lord Diplock said:
	  "My Lords,  at a  time when  more and	 more  cases
	  involving the	 application  of  legislation  which
	  gives effect	to policies  that are the subject of
	  bitter public	 and parliamentary  controversy,  it
	  cannot be too strongly emphasised that the British
	  Constitution, though	largely unwritten, is firmly
	  based on  the	 separation  of	 powers:  Parliament
	  makes the laws, the judiciary interpret them. When
	  Parliament legislates	 to remedy what the majority
	  of its members at the time perceive to be a defect
	  or a lacuna in the existing law (whether it be the
	  written law  enacted by  existing statutes  or the
	  unwritten common  law as  it has been expounded by
	  the judges  in decided  cases), the  role  of	 the
	  judiciary is	confined to  ascertaining  from	 the
	  words that Parliament
350
	  has approved as expressing its intention what that
	  intention was,  and to  giving effect to it. Where
	  the meaning  of the  statutory words	is plain and
	  unambiguous it  is not  for the  judges to  invent
	  fancied ambiguities  as an  excuse for  failing to
	  give effect  to its  plain  meaning  because	they
	  themselves consider that the consequences of doing
	  so  would   be  inexpedient,	or  even  unjust  or
	  immoral. In  controversial  matters  such  as	 are
	  involved in industrial relations there is room for
	  differences of  opinion as  to what  is expedient,
	  what is  just and  what  is  morally	justifiable.
	  Under our  constitution it is Parliament's opinion
	  on these matters that is paramount.
     While respectfully	 agreeing with the said observations
of Lord	 Diplock, that	the Parliament	legislates to remedy
and the judiciary interpret them, it has to be borne in mind
that the meaning of the expression must be found in the felt
necessities of	time. In  the background  of the  purpose of
rent legislation  and in  as much as in the instant case the
change of the user would not cause any mischief or detriment
or impairment of the shop in question and in one sense could
be called  an allied  business in  the expanding  concept of
departmental stores,  in our opinion, in this case there was
no change  of user  which attract  the mischief	 of  section
13(2)(ii)(b) of	 the Act.  The High Court, therefore, was in
error.
     In that  view of  the matter this appeal is allowed and
the order of eviction is set aside. The parties will pay and
bear their own costs.
N.V.K.					     Appeal allowed.
351




