

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Bigyan Kumar & Ors vs Union Of India & Ors on 18 March, 1988Equivalent citations: 1988 SCR  (3) 280, 1988 SCC  (3) 603
Author: M Rangnath
Bench: Misra Rangnath
           PETITIONER:
BIGYAN KUMAR & ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
UNION OF INDIA & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT18/03/1988

BENCH:
MISRA RANGNATH
BENCH:
MISRA RANGNATH
DUTT, M.M. (J)

CITATION:
 1988 SCR  (3) 280	  1988 SCC  (3) 603
 JT 1988 (1)   591	  1988 SCALE  (1)538


ACT:
     Contempt of  Courts  Act,	1971:  Sections	 2  and	 12-
obedience to  Court orders-Necessity  for-on failure-Rod  of
justice to descend down to punish-Growing conduct of parties
and  public  officers,	in  particular,	 of  ignoring  Court
orders-Deprecated.
     Practice and  Procedure: orders  of  Court-Everyone  to
render due obedience-Failure should be punished.



HEADNOTE:
%
     The Supreme  Court issued certain directions in respect
of   petitioner	   No.	 9   regarding	 accommodation	 and
reinstatement in  service in a writ petition filed on behalf
of forty  petitioners, working	in Pension  Paying  officer,
Pokhara, in  Nepal, praying  for directions  to the Union of
India,	regarding   their  permanency	and  other  benefits
applicable to similar Union Government employees.
     In the petition for contempt, it was alleged that these
directions were	 not implemented, and that consequent to the
filing of  the writ  petition, the  authorities,  especially
local officers, were ill-treating the Petitioners.
     On	 notice	  being	 issued,   affidavit  on  behalf  of
respondents  Nos.   1  to  3  and  5  were  filed  tendering
unconditional  apology,	  and  explaining   their  positions
regarding the implementation of the Court's orders.
     Respondent No.  6, who was the officer-ln-charge of the
Pension Paying	officer and  who  was  responsible  for	 the
implementation of  the	Court's	 orders,  also	tendered  an
unconditional apology  and stated,  in his  affidavit,	that
petitioner  No.	  9  was  dispossessed	of  the	 residential
accommodation on  14th	August,	 1987,	by  which  time	 the
Court's orders	of 7th August, 1987 had not been received by
him, and the accommodation had already been given to another
person, that  petitioner No. 9 was later restored to service
and given  possession of  similar accommodation and that the
rent paid  by the  petitioner for  the private accommodation
will be	 paid out  of Government  account, and requested for
condonation
281
of delay in implementing the orders of this Court.
     Disposing of the Petition,
^
     HELD:  This   Court  records  it  serious	concern	 and
disapproval of	the growing  conduct of	 parties and  public
officers, in  particular, of  ignoring the directions of the
Court and the multiplying instances of confrontation. [285F]
     The Court,	 including the	apex one  is a	part of	 the
State and  is a	 built-in mechanism  of the  Constitution to
administer justice  in accordance  with law. For discharging
that duty,  the Court  has  got	 to  adopt  an	attitude  of
critical assessment  of situations connected with litigation
brought	 before	  it  for   adjudication.  The	 manner	  of
functioning of	the Court in accord with the Rule of Law has
to be  dispassionate, objective	 and analytical.  The Judges
who preside  over these	 courts do  not act  with a sense of
superiority; nor  do they  look	 down  upon  others  in	 the
community. [285F-G]
     In order  that the	 system may efficiently work and the
purpose for which the courts are established is duly served,
it is  necessary that  everyone within	the framework of the
Rule of	 Law must accept the system, render due obedience to
orders made  and in  the event of failure of compliance, the
rod of	justice must descend down to punish. Everyone within
the system  must  realise  this	 situation  and	 should	 not
unnecessarily get into a confrontation. [285H; 286A-B]
     In the  instant case,  there is  some material which if
probed into  further, might have established that respondent
No. 6  had notice of the order of this Court before physical
dispossession of  the  petitioner  was	effected.  There  is
allegation of  adoption of  an	attitude  of  resentment  by
respondent No.	6 or  for  the	matter	of  that  the  local
officers, when	the writ  petition was	filed in this Court.
That backdrop  could supply  the motive	 for  the  delay  in
complying with the directions of this Court. It is, however,
not considered expedient to probe further into the matter on
account of  the fact that there has been compliance and each
of the respondents has tendered unqualified apology which is
accepted and  the contempt  notice is  discharged.  [285D-E;
286B]



JUDGMENT:
     ORIGINAL JURISDICTION:  Contempt Petition	(Civil)	 No.
27860 of 1987 In Writ Petition (Civil) No. 591 of 1987.
			     In
     Writ Petition (Civil) No. 591 of 1987.
282
     (Under Article 32 of the Constitution of India).
     Pankaj Kalra for the Petitioners.
     M.K. Banerjee,  Solicitor General, A.K. Ganguli, Ms. A.
Subhashini, P.	Parmeshwaran and  B.  Parthasarthi  for	 the
Respondents.
     The following order of the Court was delivered:
			 O R D E R
     An application  under Article  32 of  the	Constitution
being Writ  Petition No.  591 of 1987 has been filed in this
Court on  behalf of  40 employees  working  in	the  Pension
Paying office,	Pokhara in  Nepal asking  for a direction to
the Union  of India  to make the services of the petitioners
permanent and  for  further  directions	 in  the  matter  of
payment of allowances and other material benefits as payable
to similar  employees under the Union Government. Notice was
ordered on  the application  on 14th  July,  1987,  and	 two
weeks' time  was allowed to the respondents for filing their
counter affidavit.  On 3rd  August, 1987, the court directed
as follows:
	       "Two weeks are allowed to the respondents for
	  filing a  counter affidavit.	No further time will
	  be allowed.  One week	 thereafter is	allowed	 for
	  filing rejoiner.  Put up  this matter	 after three
	  weeks. Meanwhile,  status quo as on today shall be
	  maintained."
	   (underlining is ours).
On 7th	August, 1987,  the Court  made the following further
order:
	       "Issue notice  returnable on August 14, 1987.
	  Mr. B. Parathasarathy accepts the notice for Union
	  of India.
	       Respondent  is	directed  to   file  counter
	  affidavit within one week from today.
	       In the meanwhile petitioner No. 9 will not be
	  evicted from the quarter now occupied by him. "
Again on 14th August, 1987, the Court further directed:
283
	       " ....  Petitioner No.9	will be	 put back in
	  possession of	 the government	 quarter if  he	 has
	  already been evicted . "
Ultimately on  11th September,	1987, a three-Judge Bench of
this Court directed:
	       "Petitioner  No.	 9  will  be  reinstated  in
	  service and  he  will	 also  have  to	 be  put  in
	  possession of his quarter forth-with."
On the	allegation that	 the directions	 of  this  Court  in
regard to petitioner No. 9 were not implemented, the present
contempt proceeding  has been  initiated on  behalf  of	 the
petitioners.
     Petitioners have  alleged that  with the  filing of the
writ petition,	the treatment provided to the petitioners by
the establishment  has undergone  a change  and those of the
respondents who	 have local  base in Nepal have started ill-
treating the petitioners. Several allegations have been made
in support of the aforesaid plea. After notice was issued on
this petition, the different respondents have filed separate
affidavits in return.
     The Indian	 Embassy for  Nepal is located at Kathmandu.
The Pension  Paying office is maintained at some distance at
a place called Pokhara. It is the common case of the parties
that the  necessity to	maintain such an office is linked up
with the  historical fact  that several inhabitants of Nepal
worked in  the Indian Army under the Gorkha Regiment. Mainly
for their  convenience this  extra territorial establishment
is being maintained. Some of the petitioners are India-based
while others  are residents  of Nepal.	The establishment at
Pokhara is  under the  direct control of an officer attached
to the	Indian Embassy	styled as  officer-in-Charge, Indian
Embassy, Pension  Paying office,  Pokhara. The Ambassador of
the Indian  Embassy at	Kathmandu, being  the head of Indian
Government establishments  in Nepal,  has  also	 supervisory
jurisdiction over  the Pay  office. Respondent	No.  S,	 the
Military and  Air Attache  of the Indian Embassy is the link
between the  Embassy establishment at Kathmandu and the said
Officer-in -Charge  at Pokhara.	 Respondent  No.  3  is	 the
Controller of  Defence Accounts	 who inter alia oversees the
disbursement  of  the  pension	of  the	 ex-Army  personnel.
Respondent No.	1 is  the Union of India through its Defence
Secretary and  respondent No.  2 is  the  Secretary  of	 the
Ministry  of   External	 Affairs.   Admittedly	both   these
respondents
284
are based  in Delhi and have been impleaded being in overall
charge of their establishments.
     Shri  S.K.	  Bhatnagar,  Defence	Secretary,  in	 his
affidavit has  taken the  stand that  he was  not personally
impleaded in the writ petition. Only when he was served with
notice in  the contempt matter he came to know about Court's
directions  and	  realised  the	  full	implication  of	 the
situation when	he had	a conference with his senior counsel
on December  6, 1987.  Immediate action	 was taken to ensure
appropriate compliance. Shri K.P.S. Menon, Foreign Secretary
in the	Ministry of External Affairs has also taken the plea
that he	 was not personally impleaded as a party in the writ
petition and  came to  know about  the Court's	order at the
same conference with senior counsel on December 6, 1987, and
ensured immediate  compliance with  Court's directions. Both
these  Secretaries   to	  the	Government   have   tendered
unconditional  apology.	  The  third   respondent   is	 the
Controller of  Defence Accounts, Central Command, Meerut. He
has taken  the stand that petitioner No. 9, Shri C.N. Dubey,
is not an employee of the establishment of the Controller of
Defence Accounts  at Meerut  nor is he an employee under his
administrative control.	 According to him, he has no concern
with any  executive or administrative matter relating to the
Pension Paying	office at  Pokhara. Respondent	No.  4,	 the
Ambassador, was	 not subjected	to the contempt proceedings.
Respondent No.	5 is  the Military  and Air  Attache of	 the
Indian Embassy	at Kathmandu and is in charge of the general
administration of  the military	 wing. Apart  from  offering
unconditional apology,	he has indicated that Dubey has been
restored  to   service	and   he  has	been  provided	with
residential accommodation  and for  the period he was out of
possession  of	the  official  residence,  rent	 by  way  of
compensation has already been ordered to be paid to him.
     It is  clear from the orders made by this Court and the
facts appearing	 on the	 record that  the responsibility for
implementation of the Court's orders in regard to petitioner
No. 9 squarely rested with respondent No. 6, the officer-in-
Charge of  the Pension	Paying office. He, in his affidavit,
has stated  that Dubey was dispossessed from his residential
accommodation on 14th August, 1987, and by then the order of
this Court  dated 7th  August, 1987 had not been received by
him. That  accommodation was  given to	one Krishna Bahadur.
Later Dubey  has been  restored to service, given possession
of a  similar accommodation  as the  one from  which he	 was
displaced and  with a view to giving effect to the spirit of
the order  of this  Court, the rent which Dubey had paid for
private accommodation has been decided to
285
be borne  out of  Government account. His affidavit explains
the delay in implementation thus: A
	       "There has  been delay  in implementation  of
	  the orders  of this  Hon'ble Court due to delay in
	  communication, administrative	 bottlenecks and for
	  security reasons. It is further stated that we had
	  no intention	to flout  or disobey  the orders  of
	  this Hon'ble	Court but for the reasons beyond our
	  control,  the	  same	could	not  be	 implemented
	  notwithstanding  the	 fact  that   we   had	 all
	  intentions to	 implement the	same  in  the  right
	  earnest. The	orders have  since been implemented,
	  the petitioner  has since been reinstated and also
	  given accommodation. The delay in implementing the
	  same may  kindly be condoned and we be excused for
	  such	delay	for  which   we	 have	tendered  an
	  unconditional	 apology   at  the  outset  of	this
	  affidavit."
     There is  some material  which, if probed into further,
might have  established that respondent No. 6 had the notice
of the	order of this Court before physical dispossession of
Dubey was  effected. As already noticed, there is allegation
of adoption of an attitude of resentment by respondent No. 6
or for	the matter of that the local officers, when the writ
petition  was	filed  in  this	 Court.	 That  backdrop,  as
contended by  counsel for  the petitioners, perhaps could be
taken to  supply the  motive for the delay in complying with
the directions	of this	 Court. We  have not  considered  it
expedient to probe into the matter further on account of the
fact  that  there  has	been  compliance  and  each  of	 the
respondents has tendered unqualified apology.
     We would  part with the matter by recording our serious
concern and  disapproval of  the growing  conduct of parties
and public officers in particular of ignoring the directions
of   the   Courts   and	  the	multiplying   instances	  of
confrontation. The  Court, including the apex one, is a part
of the State and is a built-in mechanism of the Constitution
to  administer	 justice  in   accordance  with	  law.	 For
discharging that  duty,	 the  Court  has  got  to  adopt  an
attitude of critical assessment of situations connected with
litigation brought before it for adjudication. The manner of
functioning of	the Court in accord with the Rule of Law has
to be  dispassionate, objective	 and analytical.  The Judges
who preside  over these	 courts do  not act  with a sense of
superiority; nor  do they  look	 down  upon  others  in	 the
community. In order that the system may efficiently work and
the purpose  for which	the courts  are established  is duly
served, it  is necessary  that everyone within the framework
of the
286
Rule of	 Law must accept the system, render due obedience to
orders made  and in  the event of failure of compliance, the
rod of	justice must  descend down  to punish.	We hope	 and
trust  that   everyone	within	 the  system  realises	this
situation  and	 does	not   unnecessarily   get   into   a
confrontation.
     The apologies  tendered by the respondents are accepted
and the	 contempt notice  is discharged. Respondent No. 6 is
directed  to  pay  to  the  petitioners	 the  costs  of	 the
proceedings which are assessed at Rs.2,000 within one month.
N.P.V.				   Petition disposed of
287




