

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Municipal Corporation Of Greater ... vs Nagpal Printing Mills & Anr on 17 March, 1988Equivalent citations: 1988 AIR 1009, 1988 SCR  (3) 274
Author: S Mukharji
Bench: Mukharji, Sabyasachi (J)
           PETITIONER:
MUNICIPAL CORPORATION OF GREATER BOMBAY

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
NAGPAL PRINTING MILLS & ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT17/03/1988

BENCH:
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)
BENCH:
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)
RANGNATHAN, S.

CITATION:
 1988 AIR 1009		  1988 SCR  (3) 274
 1988 SCC  (2) 466	  JT 1988 (2)	 11
 1988 SCALE  (1)625


ACT:
     Bombay Municipal  Corporation Act,	 1888: ss. 169, 276,
277 and	 461/Water Charges  and	 Sewerage  &  Waste  Removal
Rules, 1976: Rule III(d)(i)-Water-Supply of-Determination of
water charges-Corporation  empowered to	 levy charge only in
respect	 of   water  actually	supplied  and  consumed-Rule
III(d)(i) containing  no  methodology  for  measuring  water
supplied-Held beyond rule making power of Corporation.



HEADNOTE:
%
     Section 169  of the  Bombay Municipal  Corporation Act,
1888 empowers the Standing Committee to make rules to charge
for the	 supply of  water and by such rules to determine the
water charges in lieu of water tax based on a measurement or
estimated measurement  of the  quantity of  water  supplied.
Section 276 provides for fixing of meters for measurement of
water supplied	and maintaining	 the instruments  in  proper
order. Bye-laws	 framed under  s. 461  in 1968 empowered the
Commissioner to	 fix a	quota. Rule  III(d)(i) of  the Water
Charges and  Sewerage and  Waste  Removal  Rules  framed  in
exercise of  the powers	 given by ss. 169 and 276 of the Act
which became effective in 1976 provided for charging for the
shortfall between  the quota and the recorded consumption in
respect of industries for which a quota has been fixed.
     The respondents were being charged for water upto June,
1977 on the basis of their actual consumption. In July, 1977
they were sought to be billed for the difference between the
charges on  the quota  basis under  the said  rule  and	 the
actual consumption  basis, which  was  objected	 to  by	 the
respondents. The  writ petition	 filed by  them in  the High
Court was rejected by a single Judge.
     In appeal	before the  Division Bench  it was contended
that the  Rule lII(d)(i)  of the  Rules was  ultra vires the
rule-making  power   of	 the   Standing	 Committee   of	 the
Corporation being  inconsistent with  s. 169 of the Act. The
High Court held that s. 169 empowers the Corporation to levy
charge only  in respect	 of the	 water that has in fact been
supplied 274
275
to and	consumed by  the consumer  and it is to be levied on
the basis  of  measurement  or	estimated  measurement,	 and
struck down the rule.
     Dismissing the  special leave  petition  filed  by	 the
Municipal Corporation,
^
     HELD: There  being no  methodology in Rule IlI(d)(i) of
the Water  Charges Rules  for  measuring  the  actual  water
supplied, that rule is beyond the powers of the Corporation.
The High  Court, was,  therefore, right in striking it down.
[278H; 279A]
     The Corporation cannot estimate and charge on the basis
of water  it makes  available for  use by  a  consumer.	 The
supply referred	 to in	s. 169 of the Act, is a supply which
is, in fact, supplied to the consumer and consumed by it. It
is only	 that  supply  which  can  be  measured.  Where	 the
measuring  device   has	 failed	  to  record   the   correct
consumption it might be estimated. But that must be on sound
guidelines otherwise  it would	be arbitrary  and mere	ipse
dixit of the authorities concerned. [278D-E]
     The by-laws made in 1968 empowering the Commissioner to
fix a  quota do not indicate any guidelines. That is bad and
unwarranted. [278E]



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Special  Leave  Petition
(C) No. 13154 of 1987.
     From the  Judgment and  order dated  16.9.1987  of	 the
Bombay High Court in Appeal No. 425 of 1981 .
     R.P. Bhatt and D.N. Mishra for the Petitioner.
     Shri  Narain   and	 Mrs.	M.   Karanjawala   for	 the
Respondents.
     The following Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     SABYASACHI MUKHARJI,  J. This  petition  for  leave  to
appeal under  Article 136  of the  Constitution is  directed
against the  Judgment and order of the Division Bench of the
High  Court   of  Bombay,  dated  September  16,  1987.	 The
respondents were  in the  business of dyeing and printing at
Industrial Estate, Kandivali, Bombay. They had originally an
1/2 inch  water connection  in their  premises. In 1971 they
had applied  to the Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay,
for a larger
276
water connection.  In 1975  they were  given  an  11/2	inch
connection.  It	  appears  that	 on  24th  September,  1975,
according to the Corporation, it fixed a water quota for the
respondents in	the figure  of 27,18,000  litres per  month.
This was, however, disputed by the respondents. But the High
Court proceeded upon the basis that this was the water quota
fixed for them.
     Water Charges  and Sewerage  and Waste Removal Rules of
the Greater  Bombay became  effective from  1st April, 1976.
These Rules  were framed  in exercise of the powers given by
sections 169  and 276  of the  Bombay Municipal	 Corporation
Act, 1888  (hereinafter called	'the Act').  Rule  III(d)(i)
provides as follows:
	  "(d)(i) In case of industries for which a quota of
	  water has  been fixed, if the recorded or computed
	  consumption falls  short of 9/10th of the quota of
	  water for any month, a consumption equal to 9/10th
	  of the quota of water shall be charged. "
     It appears,  upto June,  1977 water  charge bills	were
sent to	 the  respondents  on  the  basis  of  their  actual
consumption.  In   July,  1977	 the  respondents   received
supplementary bills for the difference between the charge on
the  quota   basis  under  the	said  rule  and	 the  actual
consumption basis.  This was objected to by the respondents.
The respondents	 contended that	 though they  had kept their
taps open  for the  full 24  hours of the day, water was not
available to  make up  anywhere near  the  quantity  of	 the
quota. The  respondents asserted  that the  Corporation	 had
agreed to verify this. The Corporation threatened to cut off
the respondents'  water supply. The respondents filed a writ
petition in  the  High	Court  of  Bombay  to  restrain	 the
Corporation from doing so.
     The learned  Single Judge	of the	High Court  found no
substance in  the case	of the	respondents. Rule  nisi was,
therefore, discharged.	The respondents	 went up  in  appeal
before the Division Bench.
     It was contended that the said rule was ultra vires the
rule-making  power   of	 the   Standing	 Committee   of	 the
Corporation being  inconsistent with section 169 of the Act.
It was	further urged  that  the  Corporation  was,  in	 the
meanwhile, not	justified in  charging on  the basis  of the
quota because  it was  in no position to supply the quantity
of water fixed. It was also urged that the said rule did not
provide any  guideline in respect of the industries to which
it was	to be  applied and  as to  how the  quota was  to be
fixed. Section 169 of the Act provides as follows:
277
     "169.(1) Notwithstanding  anything contained in section
     A 128, the Standing Committee shall, from time to time,
     make such	rules as  shall be  necessary for  supply of
     water and	for charging for the supply of water and for
     any fittings,  fixtures or	 services  rendered  by	 the
     Corporation under	Chapter X  and shall  by such  rules
     determine-
     (i)  X X X
     (ii) a water  charge in lieu of a water tax, based on a
	  measurement  of   estimated  measurement   of	 the
	  quantity of water supplied; . . ."
Sections 276 and 277 provide as follows:
     "276.(1) Where  water is  supplied by  measurement, the
     Commissioner may  either provide a meter and charge the
     consumer for  the same  such rent as shall from time to
     time be  prescribed in  this  behalf  by  the  standing
     committee, or  may permit	the consumer  to  provide  a
     meter of his own of such size, material and description
     as the Commissioner shall approve for this purpose:
     (Provided that  if such  consumer is an occupier of any
     premises, he  shall not  be provided  with a  meter  or
     permitted to  provide himself  with a meter of his own,
     unless he	complies with  such  conditions	 as  may  be
     prescribed by the Commissioner).
     (2) The Commissioner shall at all times keep all meters
     and other	instruments for	 measuring water, let by him
     for hire  to any  person, in proper order for correctly
     registering the  supply of water, and in default of his
     so doing  such person  shall not  be liable to pay rent
     for  the	same  during   such  time  as  such  default
     continues.
     277.  Where  water	 is  supplied  by  measurement,	 the
     register of the meter or other instrument for measuring
     water shall  be prima  facie evidence  of the  quantity
     consumed."
     It may  be	 mentioned  that  section  461	of  the	 Act
empowers the  Corporation to  make byelaws, not inconsistent
with  the   Act,  for  regulating  all	matters	 and  things
connected with the supply and use of
278
water. It  further appears  that by  an amendment  in  1968,
byelaws	 framed	  under	 section   461(a)  and	(b)  empower
regulating all	matters and things connected with the supply
and use of water, and is defined to mean maximum quantity of
water any  consumer or	class of  consumers is	entitled  to
receive. It  is to  be fixed by the Municipal Corporation by
order on  the basis  of an assessment of the requirement. It
further stipulates  that no  consumer in  respect of whom an
order has  been made,  may consume  water in  excess of such
quantity.
     The High Court held that the rule was framed, in terms,
in exercise  of the  powers given  by sections	169 and 276.
Section 169  specifically empowers the Standing Committee to
make rules  to charge  for the	supply of  water and by such
rules to determine the water charges "based on a measurement
or estimated measurement of the quantity of water supplied."
The High  Court has  emphasised the  past tense	 of the word
"supply", which is important and refers to something already
done. We are in agreement with the High Court's view that it
empowers the  Corporation to  levy charge only in respect of
water that  has in fact been supplied to and consumed by the
consumer and  it is to be levied on the basis of measurement
or estimated  measurement. This	 has been  conferred by	 the
terms of  Section 277  of the  Act. It	is only	 that supply
which can be measured. Where the measuring device has failed
to record  the correct consumption, it may be estimated. But
that must  be on  sound guidelines  otherwise  it  would  be
arbitrary and  mere ipse dixit of the authorities concerned.
The bye-laws  made in  1968 here empower the Commissioner to
fix a  quota. But no guideline is indicated. That is bad and
unwarranted.
     It appears	 that the  supply referred to in Section 169
of the	Act, is	 a supply which is, in fact, supplied to the
consumer and  consumed by  it. It  is only that supply which
can be	measured. We  are in  agreement with  the High Court
that where  the measuring  device has  failed to  record the
correct consumption,  it may be estimated. The circumstances
m which	 the measuring	device could be said to have failed,
the modes  of estimation  in such circumstances are provided
for by	rule lII(a), (b) and (c) of the Water Charges Rules.
The Corporation	 can not estimate and charge on the basis of
water it  makes available for use by a consumer. There is no
warrant for such a construction.
     Therefore, there  being  no  methodology  in  Rule	 III
(d)(i) of  the Water  Charges Rules for measuring the actual
water  supply,	that  rule  is	beyond	the  powers  of	 the
Corporation. The High Court was, there
279
fore, right  in striking down the Rule III(d)(i) of the said
Rules as  effective from  1st April,  1976. If	there is  no
supply, the question of measurement cannot arise by estimate
or otherwise.
     There  is	 no  ground   to  interfere.  The  petition,
therefore, fails and is dismissed.
P.S.S.				    Petition dismissed.
280




