

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Gurmesh Prakash Bishnoi vs State Of Haryana & Ors on 5 May, 1988Bench: Sujata V. Manohar, G.B. Pattanaik
           PETITIONER:
GURMESH PRAKASH BISHNOI

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF HARYANA & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT05/05/1988

BENCH:
SUJATA V. MANOHAR, G.B. PATTANAIK




ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
		  THE 5TH DAY OF MAY, 1998
Present:
	     Hon'ble Mrs. Justice Sujata V. Manohar
	     Hon'ble Mr. Justice G.B. Pattanaik
B.S. Malik,  Sr. Adv.,	K.S. Chauhan,  Adv. with him for the
appellant
Ms. Nandini Gore, Prem Malhotra, Advs., for the Respondents
			 O R D E R
The following Order of the Court was delivered:
     Special leave granted.
     Heard both sides.
     The appellant  was appointed  as member  of the Haryana
Public	Service	 Commission  with  effect  from	 4.3.80.  He
continued as  a	 member	 of  the    Haryana  Public  Service
Commission till 28.8.84 when he was appointed as Chairman of
the Haryana  Public  Service  Commission.  He  continued  as
Chairman of  the Haryana  Public Service  Commission  for  a
period of six years up to 27.8.90. The appellant was granted
pension at  the rate  of  Rs.  1,800/-	per  month  for	 his
services  as   Chairman	 of   the  Haryana   Public  Service
Commission.
     The appellant  contends that  in addition,	 he is	also
entitled to  pension for  his services	as a  member of	 the
Haryana Public Service Commission for a period of 4 years, 5
months and  24 days.  The relevant Regulation of the haryana
Government known  as the  Haryana Public  Service Commission
(Conditions of	Service)  Regulations,	1972  is  Regulation
9A(1). The relevant portion of Regulation 9A is as follows:
     9A(1): "Subject  to the  provisions
     of these regulations, every person,
     who, on  or after	the Ist	 day  of
     November, 1966,  ceases to hold the
     office  of	  the  Chairman	 or  the
     Member, shall, with effect from the
     Ist December,  1973 or  the date of
     his ceasing  to  hold  the	 office,
     whichever is  later, be entitled to
     pension for his life at the rate of
     two hundred  rupees per  month  for
     each completed  year of  service as
     the Chairman  or the Member, as the
     case may  be,  rendered  after  the
     31st day  of October, 1966, subject
     to a   maximum of eight hundred and
     fifty rupees  and seven hundred and
     fifty     rupees	   per	   month
     respectively:
     ...................................
     ...................................
     ...................................
     Provided further  that  no	 pension
     shall be  payable during the period
     for which................the Member
     may, after	 his retirement as such,
     hold  office   as	.............the
     Chairman  of  H.P.S.C.  or	 of  any
     other    State    Public	 Service
     Commission."
     The quantum  of  pension  has  since  been	 revised  to
Rs.250/- per  month for	 a member and Rs.300/- per month for
the Chairman.  The maximum  quantum of pension has also been
revised to Rs. 1,800/- per month in the case of the Chairman
and Rs.	 1,500/- per  month in	the case  of a	member.	 The
appellant is entitled to the benefit of the revised amount.
     Under Rule 9A(1) two separate ceilings are provided;
one for the pension of a Chairman and the other for the
pension of  a member.  The question  is whether a person who
has acted  both as  a member and subsequently as a Chairman,
will be	 entitled to  a pension	 only on  the basis  of	 his
services as  a Chairman	 or whether he will also be entitled
to a  separate pension	on the	basis of  his services	as a
member of  the Haryana	Public Service Commission. Under the
Union Public  Service Commission (Members) Regulations 1969,
there is  an express provision contained in Explanation (II)
to Regulation  9 which	provides that when the total service
for pension is rendered by a person, partly as a member and,
partly as  a Chairman, the pension Admissible to such person
shall be  the aggregate of the pension calculated separately
for each  such term  as a   member and as a Chairman. In the
Haryana Public	Service Commission  (Regulations) 1972 there
is no  such express  provision. However, the proviso to Rule
9A throws  some light  on the manner in which the pension is
to be  calculated. Under  the proviso,	when a member of the
Haryana Public	Service Commission  retires as	a member, he
would be  entitled to  pension as  a member.  However, if he
thereafter holds  office (inter alia) as the Chairman of the
Haryana Public	Service Commission,  he	 will  not  get	 any
pension during	the period  for which  he  holds  office  as
Chairman. There	 is an embargo on his receiving pension as a
member during the period he functions as a Chairman. Once he
ceased to  function as	a Chairman the embargo is lifted and
he would  be entitled  to get  pension as  a member  for the
period during  which he	 served as  a member  of the Haryana
Public Service	Commission. This, of course, will be subject
to the	ceiling prescribed  under Regulation 9A. At the same
time  as   the	Chairman   of  the  Haryana  Public  Service
Commission, for	 the period  of service	 rendered by  him as
Chairman, he  would also  get pension at the rate prescribed
under Regulation  9A subject  to the  maximum. The appellant
is, therefore,	entitled to  pension as	 a  member  for	 the
service he  rendered as a member prior to his appointment as
Chairman subject to the maximum, as also pension as Chairman
of the	Haryana Public	Service Commission calculated on the
basis of  the period  during which  he held  office  of	 the
Chairman, subject  to a	 maximum as  laid down in Regulation
9A. The appeal is allowed accordingly. The impugned order of
the High Court is set aside.

