

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Salim Rajmohmad Muslim vs State Of Gujarat & Ors on 3 May, 1988Equivalent citations: 1988 SCR  (3) 828, 1988 SCC  (3) 476
Author: A Sen
Bench: Sen, A.P. (J)
           PETITIONER:
SALIM RAJMOHMAD MUSLIM

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF GUJARAT & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT03/05/1988

BENCH:
SEN, A.P. (J)
BENCH:
SEN, A.P. (J)
SHARMA, L.M. (J)

CITATION:
 1988 SCR  (3) 828	  1988 SCC  (3) 476
 JT 1988 (2)   297	  1988 SCALE  (1)833


ACT:
     Constitution of  India,  1950:  Article  22(5)-Detenu's
right of  representation a  valuable  constitutional  right-
Government   to	   ensure   strict    observance   of	this
constitutional safeguard.
     Gujarat Prevention of Anti-Social Activities Act, 1985:
Section	 3(2)-Detention	  order-Representation	of   detenu-
Failure of  Government to  consider and	 dispose  of-Whether
detention illegal.



HEADNOTE:
     The petitioner,  who was detained under sub-section (2)
of section  3  of  the	Gujarat	 Prevention  of	 Anti-Social
Activities Act,	 1985, by  an order  dated 11th	 june,	1987
filed a	 writ petition in this Court, alleging that both the
detaining authority  as also  the State	 Government had	 not
considered the representation, dated 15th july, 1987 made by
him, with utmost promptitude and that, in fact, there was no
disposal of the said representation by these authorities.
     In	 the   counter-affidavit  filed	  by  the  detaining
authority, it  was averred that the representation, received
by it on 21st July 1987 was duly considered and rejected the
same day.
     Allowing the appeal,
^
     HELD: The	right of  representation under Article 22(5)
of  the	  Constitution	of   India   is	  a   valuable	 and
constitutional right.  The Government  is expected to ensure
that the constitutional safeguards embodied in Article 22(5)
are strictly observed. [830E-F]
     Mohinuddin v.  District Magistrate, Beed & Ors., [1987]
4 SCC 58 relied on.
     In the  instant case,  the petitioner  had the right to
make a	representation not  only to  the detaining authority
but also  to the  State Government  which had  the power  to
revocation. Although  the representation  made by him to the
detaining authority  has been  considered and rejected, this
is not a substantial compliance of the
829
constitutional rights  enshrined in  Article  22(5)  of	 the
Constitution. The  allegation made by the petitioner that he
made a	further representation	to the	State Government had
not been  controverted. The  State Government  had disdained
from  filing  any  counter-affidavit  for  obvious  reasons.
[830C-E]
     The wholly unexplained and unduly long delay-rather the
undeniable failure  on the  part of  the State Government in
the disposal of the representation, renders the detention of
the petitioner iilegal. [829G-H]
     The order of detention made under sub-section (2) of s.
3 of  the Gujarat  Prevention of Anti-Social Activities Act,
1985 is accordingly quashed. [831D]



JUDGMENT:
     CRIMINAL ORIGINAL	JURISDICTION: Writ  Petition  (Crl.)
No. 124 of 1988;
     (Under Article 32 of the Constitution of India)
     M.C.  Kapadia,  Y.P.  Dhingra,  B.K.  Satija  and	S.S.
Khanduja for the Petitioner.
     P.S. Poti and M.N. Shroff for the Respondent.
     The following Order of the Court was delivered:
			 O R D E R
     After hearing  learned counsel for the parties at quite
some length,  we are  satisfied that the failure on the part
of  the	  State	 Government   to  consider  and	 decide	 the
representation made  to them  by the  petitioner against his
detention by  an order	of detention  dated 11th  June, 1987
passed by  the Commissioner of Police, Surat City under sub-
s. (2)	of s.  3 of  the Gujarat  Prevention of	 Anti-Social
Activities Act,	 1985, makes his continued detention invalid
and constitutionally impermissible. Apart from various other
contentions,  Shri   Kapadia,  learned	 counsel   for	 the
petitioner rightly  contended that  there was no explanation
at all	as to  why the representation made by the petitioner
to the	State  Government  was	not  attended  to  and	kept
pending. In  view of  the wholly unexplained and unduly long
delay-rather the undeniable failure on the part of the State
Government in the disposal of the representation-renders the
detention of  the petitioner  illegal. On  the view  that we
take, there is no need to deal with various contentions
830
raised by  him on  behalf of  the  petitioner.	The  learned
counsel drew  our attention  to paragraph  8(e) of  the Writ
Petition where	the petitioner	avers inter alia that he had
made a	representation dated  15th July,  1987 to the Police
Commissioner, Surat  City, as  also to	the State Government
but  'both   the  authorities	had   not   considered	 the
representation so  made with  utmost  promptitude  and	that
there was  in fact no disposal of the said representation by
the detaining  authority as  well as  the State Government'.
This  assertion	  of  his   is	sought	to  be	met  by	 the
Commissioner of Police, Surat City, the detaining authority,
in the	counter-affidavit. It is averred in paragraph III(e)
that he	 had received  the representation on 21st July, 1987
and rejected  it on  the same  day after  due consideration.
This is	 not a	substantial compliance of the constitutional
rights enshrined  in Art.  22(5) of  the  Constitution.	 The
petitioner had	the right  not only to make a representation
to the	detaining authority but also to the State Government
which had  the power  of revocation.  In view  of this, Shri
P.S. Poti,  learned counsel appearing on behalf of the State
Government, with  his usual  fairness, rightly	accepts that
the denial  in paragraph III(e) of the counter-affidavit was
not sufficient. The fact remains that the allegation made by
the petitioner	that he had made a further representation to
the State  Government has  not been  controverted. The State
Government has	disdained from	filing any counter-affidavit
for obvious  reasons. In  Mohinuddin v. District Magistrate,
Beed & Ors., [1987] 4 SCC 58 this Court had occasion to deal
with  this   aspect.  In   that	 case,	 there	was   wholly
unexplained, unduly  long  delay  in  the  disposal  of	 the
representation by  the State Government and it was held that
further detention  of the  detenu was  rendered invalid	 and
constitutionally impermissible.	 The right of representation
under Art.  22(5) is  a valuable constitutional right and it
is  expected  that  the	 Government  will  ensure  that	 the
constitutional	safeguards   embodied  in   Art.  22(5)	 are
strictly observed. It was observed by one of us
     (SEN,J.):
	  "We say  and we  think it necessary to repeat that
	  the gravity of the evil to the community resulting
	  from anti-social  activities can  never furnish an
	  adequate reasons for invading the personal liberty
	  of  a	 citizen,  except  in  accordance  with	 the
	  procedure established	 by the Constitution and the
	  laws. The  history of	 personal liberty is largely
	  the history  of insistence  on observance  of	 the
	  procedural safeguards."
     It was next observed:
831
	  "It goes  without saying  that the  constitutional
	  right to  make a representation guaranteed by Art.
	  22(5)	 must  be  taken  to  include  by  necessary
	  implication the  constitutional right	 to a proper
	  consideration	 of   the  representation   by	 the
	  authority  to	 whom  it  is  made.  The  right  of
	  representation under	Art.  22(5)  is	 a  valuable
	  constitutional right	and is not a mere formality.
	  The representation made by the appellant addressed
	  to the  Chief Minister could not lie unattended to
	  in the  portals of the Secretariat while the Chief
	  Minister  was	  attending   to   other   political
	  affairs."
In view of the failure in the disposal of the representation
by the	State Government,  it must  be held that the further
detention of  the petitioner is illegal and constitutionally
impermissible.
     The  writ	 petition  must	 therefore  succeed  and  is
allowed. The  order of	detention passed by the Commissioner
of Police,  Surat City	under sub-s.  (2) of  s.  3  of	 the
Gujarat Prevention  of Anti-Social  Activities Act,  1985 is
accordingly quashed. We direct that the petitioner be set at
liberty forthwith.
N.P.V.				      Petition allowed.
832




