

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Moorthy vs State Of Tamil Nadu on 9 May, 1988Equivalent citations: 1988 AIR 1245, 1988 SCR  Supl. (1) 222
Author: L Sharma
Bench: Sharma, L.M. (J)
           PETITIONER:
MOORTHY

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF TAMIL NADU

DATE OF JUDGMENT09/05/1988

BENCH:
SHARMA, L.M. (J)
BENCH:
SHARMA, L.M. (J)
SEN, A.P. (J)

CITATION:
 1988 AIR 1245		  1988 SCR  Supl. (1) 222
 1988 SCC  (3) 207	  JT 1988 (2)	437
 1988 SCALE  (1)886


ACT:
     Indian  Penal   Code,   1860:   Section   302-Appellant
convicted of  murder of lady and son-Death sentence by trial
court-Confirmed by  High Court-Courts below-Whether right in
imposing death	penalty-Mitigating circumstances-Unfortunate
relationship  between	deceased,  an	elderly	  lady	 and
appellant, in  mid 20s-Sudden  spurning by partner-Appellant
experiencing  disappointment   of  discarded   lover-Vicious
effect of  film	 picturising  violence	seen  by  appellant-
Supreme	  Court	   converting	death	sentence   to	life
imprisonment.



HEADNOTE:
     The  prosecution  case  was:  The	appellant,  who	 was
working under  P.W.1, developed	 intimacy with P.W.1's wife.
However, on being found out by her daughter, P.W.2, the wife
was forced to terminate this relationship.
     Then, on 20.7.1985, the appellant saw a late night film
containing murder  scenes of four women and told his friend,
P.W.5, that  he would  take revenge  for the  betrayal by  a
lady. Thereafter  he went to the house of P.W.1 and attacked
the wife  with knife, and killed her son when he intervened.
He also caused grievous injury to the daughter.
     The appellant was convicted by the trial court under s.
302 IPC	 for double murder of the woman and her son and also
under s. 307 IPC for attempting to kill her daughter and for
house trespass	in order  to commit  the aforesaid offences,
and sentenced to death and life imprisonment respectively.
     The High  Court dismissed the appeal, and confirmed the
death sentence.
     In the  appeal by	special leave, it was contended that
although the  appellant was not in such a mental state as to
attract s.  84 of  the IPC,  he was certainly so agitated on
account of  the circumstances  beyond his  control  that  he
should be spared from the extreme penalty of death.
     Allowing the appeal,
223
^
     HELD:  The	 deceased  was	an  elderly  lady  with	 two
children who  took a defiant attitude, defending her conduct
when she  was first  confronted by  her own  daughter, which
suggests that  the unfortunate	relationship between her and
the appellant,	in his	mid  20s,  had	developed  with	 her
encouragement. When  suddenly spurned  by his  partner,	 the
appellant must	have experienced  the  disappointment  of  a
discarded lover. His mental agitation was further fuelled by
the movie, showing murder after murder. And when this upsets
a youngman, already vulnerably disturbed, the society cannot
be completely absolved of sharing the responsibility for the
tragedy	 resulting   from  the	 vicious  effect   of  films
picturising violence. [225F-H; 226A-B]
     Considering all  these circumstances, and having regard
to the	fact that  when commanded  by P.W.16,  the appellant
stopped immediately,  thereby resulting	 in the	 life of the
daughter being saved, and that he did not attempt to escape,
the sentence  of death passed against the appellant under s.
302 Indian Penal Code is converted to imprisonment for life.
[226B-C]



JUDGMENT:
     CRIMINAL APPELLATE	 JURISDICTION: Criminal	 Appeal	 No.
317 of 1988.
     From the  Judgment and  Order dated  23.1.1987  of	 the
Madras High  Court in  Criminal Appeal	No. 408	 of 1986 and
R.T. 6 of 1986.
     U.R. Lalit,  V. Krishnamurthy  and V.  Balachandran for
the Appellant.
     A.V. Rangam for the Respondent.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     SHARMA, J.	 The appellant	was convicted  by the  trial
court for  double murder  of a woman, Jayasambal by name and
her son	 Vijay Anand,  and was	sentenced to  death. He	 was
further convicted  under s.  307, I.P.C.  for attempting  to
kill Vijay Anand's sister Kavitha Priyadarsini and for house
trespass in  order to commit the aforesaid offences, and was
sentenced to life imprisonment under each of the two counts.
His appeal  before the	Madras High  Court was dismissed and
the sentence  of death	confirmed. The present Special Leave
Petition was filed against this judgment.
     2. At  the preliminary  hearing we	 were satisfied that
the appel-
224
     lant was  rightly convicted  as mentioned	earlier. We,
however, directed  notice to  be issued	 on the	 question of
sentence. Accordingly, limited special leave is granted.
     3. According  to  the  case  of  the  prosecution,	 Dr.
Manickasamy (P.W.1),  the husband of the deceased Jayasambal
and father  of deceased Vijay Anand, was a doctor working in
the Government	Hospital at  Sadras and	 the appellant	as a
Leprosy Inspector  under him.  The doctor had taken a second
wife whom  he was  keeping in  another house  with  their  3
children. The appellant developed close association with the
doctor's family	 and became  intimate with  Jayasambal.	 The
daughter Kavitha  Priyadarsini (P.W.2),	 one  day  in  1984,
found to  her shock, her mother Jayasambal and the appellant
in a  compromising position, and raised a stiff protest with
her mother.  Jayasambal attempted  to justify her romance on
the ground  that the  doctor P.W.1 was also having two women
in his	life. When  Kavitha threatened that she would report
the matter  to her  father, she	 (Jayasambal)  relented	 and
agreed	to  terminate  the  illicit  relationship  on  which
Kavitha promised  silence.  Thus  forced  by  her  daughter,
Jayasambal attempted  to avoid	the company of the appellant
and to	repel his  advances. In	 the meantime the family had
changed its  residence and  the younger sister of Jayasambal
joined them  and started  living with them. She was examined
in the case as P.W.3.
     4. On  20.7.1985 the  appellant went  to a	 late  night
cinema show with his friend P.W.5. The film contained murder
scenes of  four women.	When the  appellant came  out of the
cinema hall  after midnight he told his friend that he would
take revenge for the betrayal by a lady. He did not give any
detail. P.W.5 stated at the trial that after dropping him at
the dispensary,	 where he  lived, the  appellant left  by  a
bicycle; and  he learnt	 the next morning about the death of
Jayasambal.
     5. According  to  the  further  prosecution  story	 the
appellant knocked  the door  of P.W.1  soon thereafter.	 The
doctor came  out of  his house	and the	 appellant  suddenly
rushed into  his bed  room, locked  the door from inside and
attacked Jayasambal  with a  knife. The boy Vijay Anand aged
about 12  years, got  up and  attempted to intervene and was
killed. His  elder sister  Kavitha  (P.W.2)  also  became  a
victim and  suffered grievous injury. The doctor, P.W.1, and
Jayasambal's younger  sister  (P.W.3)  raised  shouts  which
attracted  P.W.16,   a	Police	 Inspector  living   in	 the
neighbourhood. The  Police Inspector saw the accused through
the window  with a knife in his hand and ordered him to stop
and to open the door. The appellant obeyed.
225
     6. Both  the trial court and the High Court, on appeal,
closely examined  the evidence	and came  to the  conclusion
that the  prosecution story  was correct. A plea of insanity
under s.  84, I.P.C.  taken on	behalf of  the	accused	 was
rejected.  We	have   examined	  the	evidence   and	 the
circumstances and are in agreement with the view of the High
Court.
     7. However,  the question	is whether  the courts below
were right  in imposing	 death penalty	on the	appellant or
whether the  appropriate sentence  would be imprisonment for
life. Prima  facie the case appears to be a very serious one
where two  persons were	 killed and  a third  one  seriously
injured. The  death of	a 12  year boy	trying to  save	 his
mother and the serious injury to his elder sister leaves one
shocked. Mr.  Lalit, the  learned counsel  for the appellant
contended that	although the  appellant was  not in  such  a
mental state  so  as  to  attract  s.  84,  I.P.C.,  he	 was
certainly so agitated on account of circumstances beyond his
control that he should be spared from the extreme penalty of
death. He  relied upon the decision in Srirangan v. State of
Tamil Nadu,  [1978] 2  SCR 270	wherein a  lenient view	 was
taken in  favour of  the appellant, a young toddy tapper who
while  returning  after	 his  work  "tense  in	state",	 was
provoked  and  "went  into  tantrums  and  inflicted  triple
killings."
     8. We  have closely examined the circumstances in which
the tragic  event took place. The deceased Jayasambal at the
time of	 murder was  about 35  years old  with	a  teen-aged
daughter and a 12 year old son, and the appellant was in his
late 20s.  She was  united  with  the  doctor  through	love
marriage, but  the husband later took another wife and got 3
children  from	her.  The  appellant  was  employed  in	 the
hospital  where	  the  doctor  P.W.1  was  posted.  In	this
background the	unfortunate illicit  relationship  developed
between the  deceased and  the appellant when the latter was
in his	mid 20s.  The deceased	was an elderly lady with two
children who  took a defiant attitude, defending her conduct
when she  was first  confronted by  her own  daughter, which
suggests that  the unfortunate	relationship  had  developed
with  her   encouragement.  When  suddenly  spurned  by	 his
partner,   the	 appellant   must   have   experienced	 the
disappointment of  a discarded lover. We do not suggest that
the erring  wife should	 not have  corrected herself nor can
the  persistence  of  the  appellant  in  the  situation  be
appreciated, but  we are  trying to  analyse his psychology.
His mental  agitation was  further  fuelled  by	 the  movie,
showing murder	after murder.  The vicious  effect of  films
picturising violence  in detail	 on impressionable minds has
been subject  of serious  concern for  some  time  now,	 but
unfortunately no
226
     effective step  has been  taken  so  far  to  curb	 the
growing tendency  of a	section of the film industry to cash
on human  weakness. And when this upsets a youngman, already
vulnerably  disturbed,	the  society  cannot  be  completely
absolved from  sharing the  responsibility of  the resulting
tragedy. Proceeding  further with  the facts  in the present
case, we  find that when commanded by P.W. 16, the appellant
stopped immediately,  as a  result  of	which  the  life  of
Kavitha was saved, opened the door, came out of the room and
did not attempt to escape.
     9. Considering  the above	circumstances appearing from
the prosecution	 evidence, we  are  of	the  view  that	 the
sentence of death passed against the appellant under s. 302,
Indian Penal  Code, should  be converted to imprisonment for
life. Let  that	 be  done  and	let  all  the  sentences  of
imprisonment run concurrently.
N.P.V.					     Appeal allowed.
227




