

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
State Of U.P. & Another vs Haji Ismail Noor Mohammad & Co on 9 May, 1988Equivalent citations: 1988 AIR 1409, 1988 SCR  Supl. (1) 261
Author: M Venkatachalliah
Bench: Venkatachalliah, M.N. (J)
           PETITIONER:
STATE OF U.P. & ANOTHER

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
HAJI ISMAIL NOOR MOHAMMAD & CO.

DATE OF JUDGMENT09/05/1988

BENCH:
VENKATACHALLIAH, M.N. (J)
BENCH:
VENKATACHALLIAH, M.N. (J)
PATHAK, R.S. (CJ)

CITATION:
 1988 AIR 1409		  1988 SCR  Supl. (1) 261
 1988 SCC  (3) 398	  JT 1988 (2)	468
 1988 SCALE  (1)1050


ACT:
     U.P. Sales	 Tax Act,  1948/U.P. Sales  Tax Rules,	1948
Sections 3D  and 4B/Rule 25A(5)-Tax-Special relief to dealer
holding recognition  certificate-Date  of  actual  issue  of
certificate  immaterial-Dealer	 to  be	  in  possession  of
certificate at assessment.



HEADNOTE:
     The respondent "dealer" registered under the U.P. Sales
Tax Act, 1948 was carrying on the business of manufacture of
oils from  groundnuts and  other oil  seeds, and  was  under
section 3-D  of the Act, liable to purchase-tax on oil seeds
at 3%  ad valorem  on the turnover of its purchases from the
cultivators or	other unregistered  dealers. Section  4-B of
the Act	 contemplated special  reliefs	in  purchase-tax  to
certain manufacturers  of 'notified  goods', if	 the "dealer
holds a	 recognitioncertificate issued under sub-section (2)
in respect  thereof". Sub-rule	(5) of Rule 25-A of the U.P.
Sales  Tax   Rules,  1948,   however,  stipulated   that   a
'recognition-certificate' issued for purposes of Section 4-B
of the Act "shall take effect from the date of its issue."
     On 10.2.1969  the State Government notified oils of all
kinds to  be "notified	goods" for  purposes of	 section 4-B
entitling the  dealer to a concessional rate of purchase tax
at 2%  on the  raw material  required for the manufacture of
the "notified goods". On 21.3.1969, respondent applied under
section 4-B(2)	for the	 grant of a recognition certificate,
which was  granted only	 on 5.12.1969.	The  relief  to	 the
respondent in  the form of concessional rate of purchase tax
was accordingly confined and limited to the turnover of such
first-purchases made only after 5.12.1969, the date of issue
of the recognition certificate.
     In the  writ petition filed by the respondent, the Full
Bench of the Allahabad High Court, by majority, accepted its
contention that	 the clause  in sub-rule  (5) of  Rule	25-A
regarding the  effective date of the recognition certificate
was at cross-purposes with and did not carry out the objects
of Section  4-B and  was therefore, ultra-vires section 4-B.
The High  Court held  that the	requirements of	 section 4-B
were substantially  complied with if the dealer, at the time
of assessment,	held a	recognition certificate,  subject to
the requirement	 that the turnover was after the date of the
application.
262
     Before  this  Court  the  Revenue	contended  that	 the
interpretation placed by the High Court runs in the teeth of
the express  statutory language	 and the clear intendment of
the provision  that the	 dealer should hold the 'recognition
certificate' at the time of the purchases.
     Dismissing the appeal, it was,
^
     HELD: (1)	There is  nothing  basically  wrong  in	 the
approach of  the High Court that the statutory language does
not insist  upon the  contemporaneity of  the holding of the
certificate with  the purchases and that it was suffcient if
the dealer,  subsequently, came	 to hold  a certificate	 "in
respect thereof". [267D-E]
     (2) To  insist upon  a contemporaneity  would amount to
qualifying the	word 'holds'  in section  4-B by  adding the
words "at the time of the purchases". [267E]
     (3) The  words "in	 respect  thereof"  are	 "colourless
words", but  in section	 4-B they are, in their reference to
the certificate,  suffciently, though non-specifically, wide
enough	to   include  a	  certificate  obtained	  later	 but
pertaining to the turnover in question. [267F-G]
     (4)  The	rule  which  compels  only  its	 prospective
operation  might,   not	 unreasonably,	 be   held   to	  be
inconsistent with  the ultra  vires of section 4-B. There is
nothing unreasonable  in this  construction of	section 4-B.
Indeed, by  the 1978  Amendment, this position has been made
clear  in  the	rule  itself,  which  after  the  amendment,
expressly provides  that the  certificate will	take  effect
from the  date of the application made by the dealer and not
merely from the date of the issue. [267G-H; 268A]
     Trustees v. IRC., [1946] 174 LT 133, referred to.



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 768 (NT)
of 1975.
     From the  Judgment and  Order  dated  3.1.1973  of	 the
Allahabad High Court in Writ Petition No. 4225 of 1971.
     S.C. Manchanda and A.K. Srivastava for the Appellants.
     NEMO for the Respondents.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
263
     VENKATACHALIAH,  J.   This	  appeal   by	certificate,
preferred by  the State of U.P. against the Judgment, dated,
3.1.1973 of  the Allahabad High Court in W.P. No. 4225/1971,
raises a short question whether the Rule 25-A(5) of the U.P.
Sales Tax Rules 1948 (Rules) in so far as it stipulates that
a 'recognition-certificate'  issued for	 purposes of Section
4-B of	the U.P. Sales Tax Act 1948 (Act) "shall take effect
from the  date of  its issue"  is inconsistent with does not
carry-out the  purposes of  and, therefore,  is	 ultra-vires
Section 4-B of the U.P. Sales Tax Act 1948 (Act).
     The full  bench of	 the  Allahabad	 High  Court,  by  a
majority, has,	by the judgment under appeal, preferred this
view.
     2. So far as the declaration on the law on the point is
concerned, the	matter loses much of its edge in view of the
relevant amendment  brought about  by the U.P. Taxation Laws
(Amendment &  Validation) Act  1978, which now provides that
such a	recognition certificate	 shall take  effect from the
anterior date  of the presentation of the application by the
dealer. By  the same  amendment, the certificate is rendered
valid, for  three successive  assessment years at a time and
the renewals shall also be for like periods.
     3. The  necessary and  material facts  are in  a  short
compass and  may briefly  be stated:  Respondent Haji Ismail
Noor Mohammad  & Co.  a registered  firm of  partners was  a
"Dealer" registered  under the	Act. It, inter-alia, carried
on the	business of  manufacture of oils from groundnuts and
other oil  seeds. The  oil so  manufactured was	 sold by the
Dealer both intra-state; inter-state and by way of export.
     Under Section  3-D of  the Act,  a dealer	is liable to
purchase-tax on	 oil seeds  at 3% ad-valorem on the turnover
of the	purchases made by the dealer from the cultivators or
other unregistered dealers. Section 4-B of the Act, however,
contemplates special  reliefs  to  certain  manufactures  of
notified goods, the relief being in the form of concessional
rate of	 purchase tax  or exemption  there from, as the case
may be,	 as notified  by the State-Government if the "dealer
holds a recognition-certificate issued under sub-section (2)
in respect thereof."
     On 10.2.1969,  the State  Government notified that oils
of all	kinds to be "notified goods" for purposes of Section
4-B and	 that the  purchases by the dealer, liable to tax on
the turnover  of the  firstpurchases shall  be entitled to a
concessional rate of tax at 2% on the
264
raw-material required for the manufacture of notified-goods.
     The  present   controversy	 relates   to  the  Dealer's
entitlement  to	  the  concessional  rate  of  purchase	 tax
respecting the	purchase turn-over  of	its  first-purchases
under the said notification.
     4. On  21.3.1969, Respondent  applied under  Section 4-
B(2) to the prescribed-authority, in the prescribed-form for
the grant  of a	 recognition  certificate.  The	 recognition
certificate,  for  certain  reasons,  was  granted  only  on
5.2.1969. There appears no dispute that the turn-over of the
first-purchases of  the	 Respondent,  respecting  which	 the
claim for  reduced-rate of  tax was  made, constituted	raw-
material required for the manufacture of notified goods and,
therefore, satisfied  the requirement  of the  notification.
However, the  relief was  confined to  the turnover  of such
first-purchases made only after 5.12.1969, i.e., the date of
issue of  the certificate  and the  relief in respect of the
turnover prior	to that date was refused on the basis of the
condition in  sub-rule 5  of Rule  25-A which  provided that
"such certificate  shall take  effect from  the date  of its
issue".
     Respondent, in  its writ-petition before the High Court
contended that	this clause  in Sub-Rule (5) of Rule 25-A is
at cross-purposes  with and did not carry out the objects of
Section 4-B  and is ultra-vires Section 4-B. The High Court,
by majority opinion, has accepted this contention.
     5. The  provisions of  Section 4-B	 and Rule 25A(5) may
now be noticed:
	  "4-B. Special relief to certain manufacturers.
	  (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sections
	  3, 3-A, 3-AA and 3-D:-
	  (a)  where any  goods liable	to tax under section
	       3-D are	purchased by  a dealer who is liable
	       to tax on the turnover of his first purchases
	       under that  section and	the dealer"  holds a
	       recognition    certificate    issued    under
	       subsection (2)  in respect thereof," he shall
	       be liable in respect of those goods to tax at
	       such concessional  rate, or  be	exempt	from
	       tax, as may be notified in the Gazette by the
	       State Government in that behalf;
265
	  (b)  where any goods liable to tax under any other
	       section are  sold  by  a	 dealer	 to  another
	       dealer and such other dealer furnishes to the
	       selling dealer  in the  prescribed  form	 and
	       manner a	 certificate to	 the effect  that he
	       holds a	recognition certificate issued under
	       sub-section  (2)	  in  respect  thereof,	 the
	       selling dealer  shall be liable in respect of
	       these  goods  to	 tax  at  such	concessional
	       rates, or  be  exempt  from  tax	 as  may  be
	       notified	 in   the  Gazette   by	 the   State
	       Government in that behalf.
	       (2) A  dealer who requires any goods referred
	  to in	 sub-section (1) for use as raw material for
	  the purposes	of manufacture in the State of Uttar
	  Pradesh of  any notified  goods, and such notified
	  goods are  intended to be sold by him in the State
	  or in	 the course of inter-state trade or commerce
	  or in the course of export out of India, may apply
	  within such  period, and  in such form and manner,
	  as may  be prescribed,  to the assessing authority
	  for  the   grant  of	recognition  certificate  in
	  respect thereof  and if  the	applicant  satisfied
	  such	requirements   and  conditions	 as  may  be
	  prescribed, the assessing authority shall grant to
	  the dealer  in respect of such goods a recognition
	  certificate in  such	form  and  subject  to	such
	  conditions as may be prescribed."
     Sub-Rule 5 of Rule 25-A provides:
	       "25-A(5). The  recognition certificate  shall
	  ordinarily  be   issued  within  30  days  of	 the
	  presentation of  the application  to the Sales Tax
	  Officer. If,	however, it  may not  be possible to
	  issue the  certificate within	 the time  specified
	  above, the  Sales Tax	 Officer  shall	 obtain	 the
	  approval of the Assistant Commissioner (Executive)
	  of his  range for  an	 extension  of	time,  after
	  stating the  reasons for  which it is not possible
	  to issue the certificate in time. Such certificate
	  shall take effect from the date of its issue."
				      (underlining supplied)
     In reaching  such conclusion on the point as it did the
reasoning that commended itself to the High Court was this:
	  ".... The  efficacy of the recognition certificate
	  under clause	(a) aforesaid  becomes material	 and
	  relevant at  the time of the quantification of the
	  purchase tax, i.e., when
266
	  the assessment  order is  being drawn up. It is in
	  the assessment  proceedings that  the liability to
	  pay tax  at a	 concessional rate  is fructified. A
	  dealer would	be entitled to the concessional rate
	  if he holds a recognition certificate........."
	  "........ The language of clause (b) does not make
	  it a condition precedent or a necessary obligation
	  that the purchasing dealer must at the time of the
	  purchase produce  the recognition  certificate. If
	  the	purchasing   dealer,   subsequent   to	 the
	  transaction of  purchase, furnishes to the selling
	  dealer the certificate that he holds a recognition
	  certificate, the  requirements of  clause (b)	 are
	  fully satisfied."
     The High  Court also  took into account that sub-Rule 5
of Rule	 25-A while  rightly recognising  the need  for	 the
issue of the certificate with due despatch and within a time
bound schedule,	 could not, consistently with the scheme and
purpose of  Section 4-B,  provide that the certificate shall
take effect only from the date of its issue.
     6. Shri Manchanda, learned Senior Advocate appearing in
support of  the appeal,	 contended that	 the  interpretation
placed by  the High  Court runs	 in the teeth of the express
statutory language  which stipulates that "the dealers holds
a recognition  certificate" and the interpretation placed on
it by  the High Court, if accepted, would have the effect of
adding something to the language of the section which is not
in the	Section. Learned  Counsel said	that the  High Court
had, by	 the judgment,	virtually introduced  a fiction that
under certain  circumstances where there had been a delay in
issuing the  certificate, the  dealer must be deemed to have
held the certificate.
     Shri Manchanda  submitted that  the clear intendment of
the  provision	 was  that   the  dealer   should  hold	 the
'recognition-certificate' at  the time	of the purchases and
that it	 would not be sufficient compliance with the statute
if the	dealer comes to hold it subsequently. He accordingly
commended the  view that found favour with the learned judge
in the minority in the High Court.
     We did  not have  the benefit of the arguments from the
side of the respondent, which has remained unrepresented.
     7. It  is	really	a  matter  of  construction  of	 the
language of Section
267
4-B;  whether	the  dealer   should  hold   a	 recognition
certificate at	the time  the purchases were made or whether
the requirements  of the  'Section  should  be	held  to  be
satisfied  if	the  dealer   holds  such   a	"recognition
certificate" at	 the time  of the assessment of the turnover
in question.  The High	Court has held that the requirements
of the	Section	 are  substantially  complied  with  if	 the
certificate is	available to  the dealer  at  the  time	 the
liability to tax of the turnover in question is sought to be
determined, subject  to the requirement that the turnover is
after the  date of  the application  filed by the dealer for
issue of  a certificate.  According to	the High  Court, the
date of	 actual issue  of the certificate should not be held
to be  material and  that the  benefit for  the concessional
rate of tax should be available to the dealer if the dealer,
at  the	  time	of   the  assessment,  holds  a	 recognition
certificate "in	 respect thereof'.  According  to  the	High
Court the  language of	Section 4-B does support the extreme
construction that the recognition certificate should be held
at the time of the purchases themselves.
     8. On a consideration of the matter we are persuaded to
the view  that the  construction placed	 on the provision by
the High  Court is  an eminently  plausible  one.  There  is
nothing basically  wrong in  the approach  of the High Court
that  the  statutory  language	does  not  insist  upon	 the
contemporaneity of  the holding	 of the certificate with the
purchases  and	 that  it   is	sufficient  if	the  dealer,
subsequently,  comes   to  hold	  certificate  "in   respect
thereof". It  seems possible  to say  that to  insist upon a
contemporaneity of  the purchases  and the certificate would
also amount to qualifying the word 'holds' in the section by
adding the words "at the time of the purchases".
     It is  true, the  words "in  respect thereof"  as	Lord
Greene M.R.  said are  "colourless words",  See Trustees  v.
IRC, [1946] 174 LT 133 but in Section 4-B, they are in their
reference to  the  certificate,	 sufficiently,	though	non-
specifically wide  enough to  include a certificate obtained
later but pertaining to the turnover in question. If this is
the scheme  of Section	4-B in that it does not exclude from
its contemplation  the efficacy	 and  sufficiency,  for	 its
purpose of a certificate issued subsequently, then, the rule
which compels  only its	 prospective  operation	 might,	 not
unreasonably, be  held to  be inconsistent  with and  ultra-
vires of Section 4-B. We find therefore nothing unreasonable
in this	 construction of  Section 4-B.	Indeed by  the	1978
Amendment, this	 position has  been made  clear in  the rule
itself which,  after the  amendment, expressly provides that
the certificate will take effect from the
268
date of	 the application  made by  the dealer and not merely
from the date of the issue.
     9. In this view of the matter, the judgment of the High
Court  does   not  call	 for  interference.  The  appeal  is
dismissed. However, there will be no order as to the cost.
R.S.S.					   Appeal dismissed.
269




