

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Commissioner Of Sales Tax A vs Prabhudayal Prem Narain on 26 July, 1988Equivalent citations: 1988 AIR 1775, 1988 SCR  Supl. (1) 583
Author: S Mukharji
Bench: Mukharji, Sabyasachi (J)
           PETITIONER:
COMMISSIONER OF SALES TAX A

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
PRABHUDAYAL PREM NARAIN

DATE OF JUDGMENT26/07/1988

BENCH:
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)
BENCH:
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)
RANGNATHAN, S.

CITATION:
 1988 AIR 1775		  1988 SCR  Supl. (1) 583
 1988 SCC  Supl.  729	  JT 1988 (3)	542
 1988 SCALE  (2)306


ACT:
     U.P. Sales	 Tax Act  1948/U.P. Sales  Tax Rules,  1948.
Section 3D(7)(b)/Rule  12B &  Notification No.	ST-111-2712-
Exemption  from	 tax-Dealer  entitled  to  claim  only	when
declaration forms furnished.



HEADNOTE:
     The respondent  a dealer  in pulses,  claimed exemption
under s.  30(2) of  the U.P.  Sales Tax	 Act, 1948  for	 the
assessment  year   1977-78  contending	that  the  purchases
affected by  him prior	to 1.5.1977  could not be subject to
tax. The  assessing authority and the Assistant Commissioner
(Judicial) rejected  the assessee's claim for exemption from
tax. D
      on appeal, the Tribunal was of the view that since the
assessee  had  not  furnished  Form  IlI-C(I),	he  was	 not
entitled to any exemption under s. 3-D of the Act.
      The  High Court  allowed the  revision petition on the
ground that  as the  Tribunal had  not gone  into the  proof
furnished by the assessee before the assessing authority and
the Assistant  Commissioner (Judicial)	in  support  of	 his
claim for  exemption, and  remitted the	 matter back  to the
Tribunal, directing  it to consider the question whether the
dealer was entitled to get any exemption on the basis of the
evidence that he had furnished.
     In the appeal to this Court, it was contended on behalf
of the	Revenue-appellant that	the  High  Court  was  wrong
because, in  view of  s. 3D(7-B) of the Act the assessee was
not  entitled	to  lead   any	other  evidence	 apart	from
submitting the registered dealer Form No. III-C(2).
     Allowing the Appeal,
^
     HELD: 1.  The High	 Court was in error in directing the
Tribunal to  consider the  matter on  further evidence.	 The
assessee is  entitled to  exemption only  on furnishing	 the
declaration forms.  Since he  did  not	do  so,	 he  is	 not
entitled to the exemption. [586E]
584
     2. Under  section 3-D(7)  declaration forms  have	been
prescribed by  Rule 12-B.  The provision should be construed
as mandatory.  If the  dealer had not furnished the required
declaration forms  in order to be entitled for exemption, he
cannot file  any other	evidence which	he re  quires to  be
considered by the axing authorities[1586D].
     Kedar Nath Jute Mfg. Co. Ltd. v. Commercial Tax Officer
JUDGMENT:
     M/S Govind	 Ram Tansukh Ram Tansukh Rai & Co. Budaun v.
Commissioner  of   Sales  Tax,	U.  P.,	 [1985]	 UPTC  1960,
approved.
     Abdul Ghani  Banne Khan  v. CST.,	1982 UPTC 665, over-
ruled.

&
     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 2506(NT)
of 1988.
     From the  Judgment and  order dated  18-8- 1982  of the
Allahabad High Court in S.T.R. No. 89 of 1982.
     S.C. Manchanda,  R.S. Rana	 and A.K. Srivastava for the
Petitioner.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     SABYASACHI MUKHARJI,  J.  Notice  was  issued  on	this
special leave  application stating  that the matter would be
disposed of  finally at	 the notice  stage itself.  None has
appeared pursuant  to the  notice. We  have  considered	 the
matter and heard Shri Manchanda, counsel for the petitioner.
Special leave  is granted  and the  appeal is disposed of by
the judgment herein.
     This appeal  arises from  the judgment and order of the
High Court  of Allahabad,  dated 18th August, 1982. The said
judgment was  delivered	 on  a	revision  application  filed
before the  High  Court.  The  application  related  to	 the
assessment year	 1977-78 under	the U.P.  Salex Tax Act. The
first question	involved before	 the High Court of Allahabad
was whether  the purchase of pulses effected by the assessee
prior to  1.5.1977 could  be subjected	to tax under Section
30(2) of  the Sales  Tax Act.  The Tribunal  held that these
could be so subjected.
     The High Court referred to the Notification No. ST-III-
2712/X-
     6(2)-77 U.P.  Act	XV-48-order-77	and  held  that	 the
contention of the
585
assessee could	not be	accepted that  he had  purchased the
pulses in  question before  1st	 May,  1977.  There  was  no
dispute on  this contention  raised subsequently.  The	only
contention that was urged before the High Court was that the
Asstt. Commissioner (Judicial), was about granting relief to
the assessee  in  respect  of  his  turnover  on  pulses  of
Rs.3,75,500 to	the extent  of Rs.3,19,673  on the  basis of
certain	 evidences   that  had	 been  produced	 before	 the
assessing  authority   and  the	  Asstt.  Commissioner.	 The
Tribunal was  of the  view that	 since the  assessee had not
furnished  From	  IIl-C(1),  he	 was  not  entitled  to	 any
exemption under	 Section 3-D  of the Act. It appears that in
the case  of Abdul Ghani Banne Khan v. CST, [1982] UPTC 665,
a learned  Single Judge	 of the High Court of Allahabad held
that on	 the language  of Section  3D(7-b), the assessee was
entitled  to  lead  evidence  to  the  satisfaction  of	 the
assessing authority  that the  sale was made to a registered
dealer and was not confined only to furnishing form IIIC(2).
There was,  however, an	 earlier decision to the contrary in
the case  of Commissioner  of Sales  Tax v.  Kailash Trading
Co., [1981]  UPTC 82  1 of  the same  Court which  has	been
referred to in this case.
     In the  judgment under appeal the High Court was of the
view that  as the  Tribunal had	 not  gone  into  the  proof
furnished by the assessee before the assessing authority and
the A.C.  (J) in  support of  his claim	 for exemption which
according to the decision in Abdul Ghani Banne Khan (supra),
should be  examined by	the Tribunal, it remitted the matter
to the	Tribunal. In the premises the High Court allowed the
revision and  remitted the  matter back	 to the Tribunal and
directed it  to consider the question whether the dealer was
entitled to  get any  exemption on the basis of the evidence
that he	 had  furnished.  According  to	 the  appellant	 the
revenue, here  the High	 Court was  wrong because in view of
Section 3D(7-b)	 of the Act, he was not entitled to lead any
other evidence	apart  from  submitting	 to  the  registered
dealer Form  No. III-C(2).  Clause (b) of sub-section (7) of
Section 3-D provides as follows:
	  "Every sale  within  Uttar  Pradesh  by  a  dealer
	  either directly  through another,  whether on	 his
	  own account  or on account of any one else. shall,
	  for the  purposes of	subsection (2), be deemed to
	  be a	sale to	 a person  other than  a  registered
	  dealer, unless the dealer selling the goods proves
	  otherwise to	the satisfaction  of  the  assessing
	  authority after  having furnished such declaration
	  or certificate,  obtained from  the  purchaser  of
	  such goods,  in such	form and  manner and  within
	  such period, as may be prescribed."
586
     Under the	said Section,  declaration forms  have	been
prescribed by  Rule 12-B.  It  appears	that  this  question
stands concluded so far as the U.P. is concerned, by a Bench
decision of  the said  High Court in the case of M/s. Govind
Ram Tansukh  Ram Tansukh Rai & Co. Budaun v. Commissioner of
Sales Tax,  U.P., [1985],1060.	There, after considering the
aforesaid two  decision of  the learned	 Single Judges,	 the
Division Bench	held that  if the assesses had not furnished
the required  declaration forms	 in order to be entitled tor
exemption, the	assessee could	not file  any other evidence
which required to be considered by the taxing authorities.
     In that view of the matter the decision of the Division
Bench must  prevail. This  also follows	 logically from	 the
decision of  this Court	 in Kedar Nath Jute Mfg. Co. Ltd. v.
Commercial Tax	officer &  Ors.,16 STC 607, where this Court
while dealing  with  similar  provisions  under	 the  Bengal
Finance Sales  Tax Act,	 held that  the dealer	could  claim
exemption  on	the  sales   to	 the  registered  dealer  by
furnishing the	declaration form and unless such declaration
forms are  furnished, the  dealer was  not entitled  to	 any
exemption. This Court further reiterated that the provisions
of this	 nature should	be construed  as mandatory.  [n that
view of the matter there is no scope for taking any contrary
view. In  the premises, the High Court in the impugned order
was in	error hi  directing the	 Tribunal  to  consider	 the
matter on  other  evidence.  The  assessee  is	entitled  to
exemption only	on furnishing  declaration forms.  Since the
assessee did not do so, he was not entitled to exemption.
     The appeal	 is allowed  and the  decision of  the	High
Court is  set  aside  and  the	order  of  the	Tribunal  is
restored. There will be no order as to costs.
N.V.K.					Appeal allowed.
587




