

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Kiran Bedi & Ors vs Committee Of Inquiry & Anr on 18 August, 1988Equivalent citations: 1988 AIR 2252, 1988 SCR  Supl. (2) 518
Author: E Venkataramiah
Bench: Venkataramiah, E.S. (J)
           PETITIONER:
KIRAN BEDI & ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
COMMITTEE OF INQUIRY & ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT18/08/1988

BENCH:
VENKATARAMIAH, E.S. (J)
BENCH:
VENKATARAMIAH, E.S. (J)
DUTT, M.M. (J)
OJHA, N.D. (J)

CITATION:
 1988 AIR 2252		  1988 SCR  Supl. (2) 518
 1988 SCC  (4)	49	  JT 1988 (3)	372
 1988 SCALE  (2)272
 CITATOR INFO :
 R	    1989 SC 714	 (6,16,26,41,46,TO 49)


ACT:
    Commissions	  of  Inquiry  Act,   l952/Commissions	  of
Inquiry	 (Central)  Rules, 1972: Sections 8B,  8C/Rule	5(5)
(a)-Committee  of  lnquiry-Examination	of   witnesses-Delhi
Administration directed to examine its witnesses first-Right
of cross-examination-Some of the similarly placed persons to
be cross-examined in the beginning and others at the end  of
the  inquiry  is discriminatory-Non-issuance  of  notice  by
Committee  to  a person makes no difference if	that  person
satisfies the statutory conditions.



HEADNOTE:
    A  Committee consisting of Goswamy and Wadhwa,  JJ.	 was
constituted  on 23rd February, 1988 to inquire into  certain
incidents involving lawyers and police officers, which	took
place in January, 1988.
    Pursuant   to  this	 Court's  order	 dated	 2.6.88	  to
reconsider the whole question relating to the order in which
the  witnesses had to be examined, the Committee  issued  an
order on 29.6.88 on the basis of which notices under Sec. 8B
were  issued  to  three	 other	officers,  but	not  to	 the
petitioners.  It  was  directed by the	Committee  that	 the
petitioners  be	 cross-examined	 at  the  beginning  of	 the
inquiry. On their refusal, the Committee directed the filing
of a complaint against them for an offence punishable  under
Section 178 IPC. Pursuant to the complaints filed on  behalf
of  the	 Committee,  criminal  proceedings  were   initiated
against the petitioners before the Metropolitan Magistrate.
    Against  the  above	 directions and	 complaints  by	 the
Committee, the petitioners have approached this Court by way
of the present Writ Petitions/Special Leave Petitions.
    The petitioners submitted that they did not either	wish
to  delay  the	proceedings or to  show	 disrespect  to	 the
Committee, but	only wanted to protect their own interest in
making the submission before the Committee as per the  legal
advice given to them.
    Quashing  the  orders  of the  Committee  directing	 the
filing of the
						  PG NO 518
						  PG NO 519
complaints  and the criminal proceedings  initiated  against
the petitioners before the Metropolitan Magistrate  pursuant
to the complaints, this Court,
    HELD:  1. The Delhi Administration has to examine  first
all  its  witnesses  as_required  by  Rule  5(5)(a)  of	 the
Commissions  of Inquiry (Central) Rules, 1972  framed  under
the  Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952. Even those  witnesses
who may have filed affidavits already may first be  examined
in  chief  before  they	 are  cross-examined.  The  question
whether	 a party hair the right of cross-examination or	 not
shall be decided by the Committee in accordance with Sec. 8C
of the Act. This direction does not apply to those witnesses
falling under Sec. 8B of the Act, who have to be examined at
the  end of the inquiry as opined by the  Committee  itself.
[520F-H]
    2.1. The petitioners are persons who fall under Sec.  8B
of the Act and have to be dealt with accordingly. [522A-B]
    2.2	 If the three persons to whom notices under Sec.  8B
have  been issued are to be examined even according  to	 the
Committee at the end or	 the inquiry there is no justifiable
reason to deny the same treatment to the petitioners who are
in  the same posit~on as those three persons. The action  of
the  Committee	in asking them to be cross-examined  at	 the
beginning of the inquiry appears to be discriminatory.	Mere
non-issue of notices to them under Sec.8B ought not to	make
any  difference	 if they  otherwise satisfy  the  conditions
mentioned  in  Sec. 8B. The issue of such a  notice  is	 not
contemplated  under Sec. 8B of the Act. It is enough  if  at
any  stage the Commission considers it necessary to  inquire
into the conduct of any person. Such person would thereafter
he governed by Sec. 8B of the Act. [522E-G]
    3.	The Committee should not have, in the  circumstances
of  the	 case, directed the filing of  a  complaint  against
either	of the petitioners for an offense  punishable  under
Sec. 178 IPC. [523C, D]
    [For  Judgment  containing the reasons for	this  order,
please Sec (1989) 1 SCR p. 20.]



JUDGMENT:
    ORIGINAL/CIVIL   APPELLATE JURISDICTION:  Writ  Petition
No. 626 of 1988 etc. etc.
    (Under Article 32 of the Constitution of India)
    G.Ramaswamy,    Additional	 Solicitor    General,	  S.
Murlidharan,  A.D.N. A. Subba Rao and and Krishan Kumar	 for
the Petitioners.
						  PG NO 520
    Kuldip   Singh,  Additional	 Solicitor   General,	K.K.
Venugopal, Kapil Sibbal, Lal Chand, C.S. Vaidyanathan,	H,S.
Phoolka,  N.S.	Das,  Rajiv  Khosla,  P.  Tripathi,  Kailash
Vasdev, Miss A. Subhashini, Harish Salve and Ravinder  Sethi
for the Respondents.
The following Order of the Court was delivered:
				 ORDER
    VENKATARAMIAH,  J. It is unfortunate that this case	 has
arisen between lawyers and police who are both guardians  of
law and who constitute two important segments of society  on
whom the stability of the country depends. It is hoped	that
cordiality between the two sections will be restored soon.
    In	order to avoid any further delay in the	 proceedings
before the Committee consisting of Goswamy and Wadhwa,	JJ.,
constituted  by Order dated 23rd February, 1988	 to  enquire
into certain incidents which took place on the 15th January,
1988,  2lst January, 1988 and 17th February, 1988,  we	pass
the  following order now but we shall give detailed  reasons
in support of this order in due course.
The order is as under:
    1.	This  order is passed on the basis of  the  material
available on record, the various steps already taken  before
the Committee and other peculiar features of the case.
    2. The Delhi Administration has to examine first all its
witnesses as required by Rule 5(5)(a) of the Commissions  of
Inquiry	 (Central) Rules, 1972 (hereinafter referred  to  as
'the  Rules') framed under the Commissions of  Inquiry	Act,
1952  (hereinafter  referred to as "the	 Act').	 Even  those
witnesses who may have filed affidavits already may first be
examined-in-chief  before they are cross-examined, since  it
is stated that when the affidavits were filed the  deponents
did  not  know what the other parties who  have	 also  filed
affidavits  had	 stated in their  affidavits.  The  question
whether	 a party has the right of cross-examination  or	 not
shall be decided by the Committee in accordance with section
8-C  of the Act. In the facts and circumstances of the	case
to  which  reference will be made hereafter  this  direction
issued to the Delhi Administration to examine its  witnesses
first  as provided by rule 5(5)(a) of the Rules referred  to
above  does  not  apply to  those  witnesses  falling  under
section	 8-B of the Act, who have to be examined at the	 end
of the inquiry as opined by the Committee itself.
						  PG NO 521
    3. We have gone through the several,affidavits and other
material  placed before the Committee and also the  -Interim
Report	dated 9.4.88 passed by the Committee. In para 13  of
the Interim Report the Committee has observed thus:
    "During  the course of the inquiry, we have to   examine
the  conduct  of  various police  officers  and	 others	 and
particularly,  as the record .shows, of the D.C.P.  (North),
Addl. D.C.P. (North), S.H.O., P.S. Samepur (Badli) and	S.I.
Incharge Police Post, Tis Hazari and S.I.,Samepur (Badli)."
In para 14 of the Interim report it is observed:
    "Lawyers have seriously urged that this Committee should
send a report recommending suspension of the D.C.P.  (North)
Ms. Kiran Bedi"
    Ultimately the Committee recommended the transfer of the
petitioners  in these cases, namely, Ms. Kiran Bedi,  D.C.P.
(North)	 and Jinder Singh S.I. Incharge, 'Police  Post,	 Tis
Hazari.
Section 8-B of the Act reads :
    "8-B. If, at any stage of the inquiry, the Commission-
    (a)	 considers it necessary to inquire into the  conduct
of any person ; or
    (b)	 is of opinion that the reputation of any person  is
likely to be prejudicial affected by the inquiry,
    the	 Commission shall give to that person  a  reasonable
opportunity  of	 being heard in the inquiry and	 to  produce
evidence in his defence :
    Provided that nothing in this section shall apply  where
the credit-of a witness is being impeached."
    In	its Interim Report the Committee  has  unequivocally
observed  that	it  had to examine the	conduct	 of  various
police	officers, and in particular among others  Ms.  Kiran
Bedi,  D.C.P.  (North) and Jinder Singh ,  S.  I.,  Incharge
Police Post, Tis Hazari.
						  PG NO 522
    Having  given  our	anxious	 consideration	to  all	 the
aspects	 of the case we hold that the petitioners Ms.  Kiran
Bedi and Jinder Singh are persons who fall under section 8-B
of the Act and have to be dealt with accordingly.
    4.	According to the Committee's own opinion  formed  in
the  light of the facts and circumstances of the  case,	 all
those  persons to whom notices under section 8-B of the	 Act
are  issued have to be examined at the end of  the  inquiry.
This  is obvious from the order of the Committee  passed  on
29.6.88 after it was asked by this Court by its order  dated
June  2, 1988 to reconsider the whole question	relating  to
the  order in which the witnesses had to be examined in	 the
case. In its order dated 29.6.88 the Committee has  observed
thus:
    "Without  going into the controversy if Rule 5(5) is  an
independent  Rule or is governed by section 8-B and  8-C  of
the  Act, we would direct that in the circumstances  of	 the
case  three persons namely, the Additional  Commissioner  of
Police (Special Branch), D.C.P. (Traffic) and Mr. Gopal	 Das
Kalra, SI to whom notices under section 13-B of the Act have
been issued be examined at the end of the inquiry."
    If three persons referred to above to whom notices under
section	 8-B  have  been  issued are  to  be  examined	even
according  to the Committee at the end of the inquiry  there
is  no-justifiable reason to deny the same treatment to	 the
petitioners  Ms. Kiran Bedi and Jinder Singh who are in	 the
same  position	as those three persons. The  action  of	 the
Committee  in  asking  them  to	 be  cross-examined  at	 the
beginning of the inquiry appears to us to be discriminatory.
Mere  non issue of notices to them under section  8-B  ought
not  to	 make any difference if they otherwise	satisfy	 the
conditions  mentioned  in section 8-B. The issue of  such  a
notice is not contemplated under section 8-B of the Act.  It
is  enough  if	at any stage  the  Commission  considers  it
necessary  to inquire into the conduct of any  person.	Such
person	would thereafter be governed by section 8-B  of	 the
Act.  The  Committee  should  have  considered	whether	 the
petitioners were entitled to be treated as persons  governed
by section 8-B of the Act before asking them to get into the
witness	 box for being cross-examined. If the Committee	 had
found  that the petitioners were covered under	section	 8-B
then perhaps they would not have been asked to get into	 the
witness	 box for  being cross-examined till the end  of	 the
inquiry.  The Committee would have then asked them  to	give
						  PG NO 523
evidence along with others who were similarly placed at	 the
end of the inquiry.
    On	behalf of both the petitioners it is submitted	that
they did not either wish to delay the proceedings or to show
disrespect to the Committee but only wanted to protect their
own interest by making the submission which they made before
the Committee as per legal advice given to them.
    This is not a case where the circumstances in which	 the
several	 incidents  that had taken place were not  known  to
anybody	 else. The affidavits and other material before	 the
Committee show that there were a large number of persons who
were  eye-witnesses  to	 the incidents and  why	 could	give
evidence before the Committee.
    Taking into consideration all the aspects of the case we
feel that the Committee should not have in the circumstances
of  the	 case  directed the filing of  a  complaint  against
either	of the petitioners for an offence  punishable  under
section 178 I.P.C.
    In view of the foregoing we feel that the orders of	 the
Committee  directing  the filing of the complaints  and	 the
criminal  proceedings  initiated  against  the	 petitioners
before	 the   Metropolitan  Magistrate	 pursuant   to	 the
complaints  filed  on  behalf of  the  Committee  should  be
quashed	 and  we accordingly quash the said  orders  of	 the
Committee and also the criminal proceedings.
    A  judgment containing the reasons for this	 order	will
follow.
    Before  concluding	this order we record  the  statement
made  by  Shri Kuldip Singh,  learned  Additional  Solicitor
General	 appearing  for the Delhi  Administration  that	 the
Delhi  Administration  and its police  officers	 will  fully
cooperate  with	 the  Committee so that	 the  Committee	 may
complete  its work as early as possible. We also record	 the
statement  made	 by Shri G.  Ramaswamy,	 learned  Additional
Solicitor  General that he and his clients, the	 petitioners
in  this case hold the Committee in great respect  and	that
they  never intended to show any kind of discourtsey to	 the
Committee.  He also expresses apology for using one  or	 two
strong	words  against the Committee in the  course  of	 the
arguments in this Court.

