

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Dilbagrai Punjabi vs Sharad Chandra on 8 August, 1988Equivalent citations: 1988 AIR 1858, 1988 SCR  Supl. (2) 276
Author: L Sharma
Bench: Sharma, L.M. (J)
           PETITIONER:
DILBAGRAI PUNJABI

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
SHARAD CHANDRA

DATE OF JUDGMENT08/08/1988

BENCH:
SHARMA, L.M. (J)
BENCH:
SHARMA, L.M. (J)
PATHAK, R.S. (CJ)

CITATION:
 1988 AIR 1858		  1988 SCR  Supl. (2) 276
 1988 SCC  Supl.  710	  JT 1988 (3)	308
 1988 SCALE  (2)523


ACT:
    Civil  Procedure  Code.  Section  100-Appeal-Subordinate
courts refuse to consider evidence having direct hearing  on
disputed issue	 Error arising gives birth to a	 substantial
question  of law-Whether High Court has jurisdiction to	 set
aside finding.
%
    Madhya Pradesh Accommodation Control Act, 1961,  Section
12(1)	(f)-Suit  for  eviction	 of  tenant   for   personal
necessity-Essential  for  plaintiff to	prove  ownership  of
property-Partition  deed  by  which  ownership	claimed	 not
produced-Effect	  of-Court  under  duty	 to  examine   other
relevant evidence on record.



HEADNOTE:
    The respondent-plaintiff filed a suit under s.  l2(l)(f)
of  the Madhya Pradesh Accommodation Control Act, 196l,	 for
eviction of the appellant-tenant, on the ground of  personal
necessity.  The	 trial court rejected the  plaintiffs  claim
that he was the owner of the house in question.
    On	appeal, the Additional District.judge confirmed	 the
finding of the trial court on the ground that the  plaintiff
did not produce the deed of partition, alleged to have	been
executed  by  the  parties and, under  which  the  house  in
question  was said to have been allotted to him.  In  second
appeal, the High Court reversed the finding and decreed	 the
suit.
    In the appeal to this Court, on behalf of the tenant  it
was  contended	that  it was essential	for  the  plaintiff-
respondent  to	establish  that	 he was	 the  owner  of	 the
premises,  and that the concurrent finding of fact  recorded
by  first two courts was binding on the High Court under  s.
100  of	 the Code of Civil Procedure and  its  reversal	 was
illegal.
    Dismissing the appeal,
    HELD:  1.1 The High Court's power to interfere with	 the
finding of fact reached by the first appellate court  cannot
be  denied  if, when the lower appellate  court	 decides  an
issue  of fact, a substantial question of law  arises,	even
						  PG NO 276
						  PG NO 277
though the High Court, while hearing the appeal under s. 100
of  the Code of Civil Procedure, has no jurisdiction to	 re-
appraise the evidence and reverse the conclusion reached  by
the first appellate   court.[280C]
    The court is under a duty to examine the entire relevant
evidence  on record and if it refuses to consider  important
evidence having direct	 B bearing on the disputed issue and
the error which arises is of a magnitude that it gives birth
to  a substantial question of law, the High Court  is  fully
authorised to set aside the finding. [280D]
    1.2	 A perusal of the language of the clause (f)  of  s.
12(l) of the Madhya Pradesh Accommodation Control Act, 1961,
and  comparison	 there	of with that in	 the  other  clauses
clearly indicates that it is essential for the plaintiff who
claims	that he requires the shop personally for starting  a
business, to establish that he is the owner of the premises.
[278G-H]
    In	the  instant case, though the partition	 deed  under
which the	  D plaintiff claims exclusive title to	 the
property  was  not produced in court,  the  first  appellate
court was under a duty to consider all the relevant evidence
led  by the parties along with the circumstances. The  Civil
Judge, who tried the suit as well as the Additional District
Judge,	confirming  the	 decision of the  trial	 court,	 had
seriously  erred in not considering the entire	evidence  on
record	including  the	reply  to the  notice  sent  by	 the
plaintiff-respondent,  wherein	the  tenant-appellant	 has
accepted  the  plaintiff's title and  counter-foil  receipts
signed	by  the appellant in which the	plaintiff  had	been
described   as	 the   owner  of  the	property.   In	 the
circumstances,	the  High  Court  was  fully  justified	  in
reversing the finding of the courts below. [279E, F-G, 280A]



JUDGMENT:
   CIVlL  APPELLATE JURlSDlCTlON: Civil Appeal No. 3387	 of
1981
    From  the  Judgment	 and Order dated  20.8.1981  of	 the
Madhya	Pradesh High Court in Second Appeal No. 33 of  1978.
    S.N.  Kacker,  Sanjay Sareen and S.K.  Gambhir  for	 the
Appellant.
    S.K. Jain for the Respondent.
    The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
						  PG NO 278
    SHARMA,J. The appellant is in possession of a shop in  a
town in Madhya Pradesh as a tenant under the respondent	 who
filed a suit out of which the present appeal arises for	 his
eviction  on the ground of personal necessity. The suit	 was
dismissed by the trial court and the first appellate  court.
The  High Court in second appeal has reversed  the  decision
and passed a decree.
    2.	 The  case  is	governed  by  the   Madhya   Pradesh
Accommodation Control Act, 1961 (hereinafter referred to  as
the Act) and s. 12(1)(f) deals with the ground of landlord's
bona fide necessity with reference to buildings let out	 for
non-residential purposes, in the following words:
    "12.    Restriction	  on   eviction	   of	 tenants-(l)
Notwithstanding	 anything to the contrary contained  in	 any
other  law or contract, no suit shall be filed in any  Civil
Court	against	  a  tenant  for  his  eviction	  from	 any
accommodation except on one or more of the following grounds
only, namely :
	     (a)  -----------------------------------------
		  -----------------------------------------
    (f)	 that  the  accommodation  let	for  non-residential
purposes  is  required	bona fide by the  landlord  for	 the
purpose	 of continuing or starting his business or  that  of
any  of his major sons or unmarried daughters if he  is	 the
owner  thereof	or  for any person  for	 whose	benefit	 the
accommodation is held and that the land- lord or such person
has    no   other   reasonably	 suitable    non-residential
accommodation  of his own in his occupation in the  city  or
town concerned ;
	     (g)   .........................................
		   .........................................
    3.	The  plaintiff	claims that  he	 requires  the	shop
personally  for	 starting  a  business	and  it	 is  rightly
contended  by Mr. Kacker, learned counsel appearing for	 the
appellant, that it is essential for him to establish that he
is  the owner of the premises. A perusal of the language  of
the  clause  (f) and a comparison thereof with that  in	 the
other clauses clearly leads to this conclusion. The issue in
the case is whether the plaintiff, respondent before us, has
been able to establish this condition.
						  PG NO 279
    4. The defendant has been admittedly paying the rent  to
the plaintiff who, therefore, is included in the  expression
'landlord'  as defined in the Act as a person  receiving  or
entitled  to receive the rent whether on his own account  or
on  account  of	 any other person. In the  register  of	 the
Municipal Corporation the property stands in the name of the
plaintiff's  brother  Hukum Chand Jain. On this	 ground	 the
trial  court  rejected the plaintiff's case  that  the	shop
belongs	 to  him. On appeal the Additional  District  Judge,
Gwalior confirmed the finding mainly on the ground that	 the
plaintiff  did	not produce the deed of partition  which  is
alleged to have been executed by the parties and under which
the house was claimed by the plaintiff to have been allotted
to him. The Court also held that since the plaintiff  failed
to  plead  his ownership and further neglected	to  get	 his
plaint	amended	 after his title was denied in	the  written
statement,  he was not entitled to rely on any	evidence  in
support	 of  his  title. On the plaintiff  filing  a  second
appeal,	 the Madhya Pradesh High Court reversed the  finding
and decreed the suit.
    5. Mr. Kacker strongly urged that the concurrent finding
of fact recorded by the first two courts was binding on	 the
High  Court under s. 100 of the Code of Civil Procedure	 and
its reversal is illegal. We have gone through all the  three
judgments and some of the documents placed before us by	 the
learned	 counsel for the parties and we find that  the	High
Court  was  fully justified in reversing  the  finding.	 The
first  appellate court was not correct in assuming that	 the
plaintiff  had failed to assert in the plaint his  ownership
of the disputed shop. The necessary pleading is to be  found
in paragraph 1 of the plaint, which of course was denied  in
the written statement and the parties led their evidence  on
this  question at the trial. It is true that  the  partition
deed under which the plaintiff claims exclusive title to the
property was not produced in court, but the first  appellate
court was under a duty to consider all the relevant evidence
led   by   the	parties	 along	 with	the   circumstances.
Unfortunately neither the Civil Judge who tried the suit nor
the Additional District Judge confirming the decision of the
trial court adverted to important items of relevant evidence
which were considered and relied upon by the High Court. The
plaintiff, before filing the suit, sent a notice through his
counsel,  to the appellant in which it was stated  that	 the
shop  in question belongs to him. In his reply sent  through
an   advocate  the  appellant,	while  denying	 the   other
statements in the notice, accepted the plaintiff's title  in
the following words :
    "That  it  is admitted that my client is  occupying	 the
shop situated at Dal Bazar belonging to your client. . . . "
						  PG NO 280
    The plaintiff also produced counter foil receipts signed
by the tenant-appellant in which the plaintiff was described
as "the owner of property". It was not a case of an isolated
single	receipt-quite  a  number  of  such  documents	were
produced  in  the trial court. The High Court was  right  in
pointing  out that the courts below had seriously  erred  in
not considering the entire evidence on the record  including
the  aforesaid	documents. It is true that  the	 High  Court
while  hearing the appeal under s. 100 of the Code of  Civil
Procedure  has no jurisdiction to re-appraise  the  evidence
and  reverse the conclusion reached by the  first  appellate
court, but at the same time its power to interfere with	 the
finding	 cannot be denied if when the lower appellate  court
decides	 an  issue  of fact a substantial  question  of	 law
arises.	 The  court is under a duty to	examine	 the  entire
relevant  evidence on record and if it refuses	to  consider
important  evidence  having direct bearing on  the  disputed
issue  and the error which arises is of a magnitude that  it
gives birth to a substantial question of law, the High Court
is  fully authorised to set aside the finding. This  is	 the
situation  in  the  present  case.  We,	 therefore,  do	 not
discover  any defect in the judgment of the High Court,	 and
the appeal is accordingly dismissed with costs.
    N.P.V.			  Appeal dismissed.




