

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Om Prakash vs Amarjit Singh & Anr on 10 August, 1988Equivalent citations: 1988 SCR, Supl. (2) 362  1988 SCC  Supl.  780
Author: A Sen
Bench: Sen, A.P. (J)
           PETITIONER:
OM PRAKASH

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
AMARJIT SINGH & ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT10/08/1988

BENCH:
SEN, A.P. (J)
BENCH:
SEN, A.P. (J)
VENKATACHALLIAH, M.N. (J)

CITATION:
 1988 SCR  Supl. (2) 362  1988 SCC  Supl.  780
 JT 1988 (3)   555	  1988 SCALE  (2)567


ACT:
    Civil Procedure Code, 1908: Section 105(2)-Order 9, Rule
7- Application for setting aside order placing defendant  ex
parte  dismissed  by trial court as unsigned-High  Court  in
revision  remitting application for disposal after  allowing
defendant  to  affix signature re_Application  dismissed  by
trial  court  as time barred-Suit for  specific	 performance
decreed on basis of witnesses examined in ex  parte-District
Court  affirming  that	application  war  time	barred,	 but
remanding suit for fresh disposal-Remand order-Not  appealed
against-Assuming  finality-  Whether defendant	entitled  to
adduce	fresh  evidence	 and recall  witnesses	examined  ex
parte, on remand.
%
    Specific  Relief Act, 1963: Sections 20 and 34-Suit	 for
specific performance-Grant of relief-Discretionary-Equitable
and   discretionary  jurisdiction  of  Court-When   can	  be
exercised.



HEADNOTE:
    In	a suit for specific enforcement of an  agreement  to
sell  the  suit	 property filed by  respondent	No.  1,	 the
appellant was placed ex parte for default of non-appearance,
after he entered appearance and filed his written statement.
Thereafter, the appellant's application under Order IX, r. 7
of  C.P.C. for setting aside the above order  was  dismissed
for  default.  After respondent No. ~ examined	two  of	 his
witnesses,  appellant  filed  an  unsigned  application	 for
setting aside the aforesaid orders. This was also  dismissed
by  the trial court because it was unsigned. The High  Court
in  revision, allowed the appellant's prayer,  and  remitted
the  application  for  fresh disposal,	after  affording  an
opportunity  to	 the  appellant	 to  sign  the	application.
Thereafter the appellant signed the application, but it	 was
again  rejected	 by  the trial court,  as  barred  by  time,
reckoning the date of affixture of signature as the date  of
its  filing,  and  the	suit was decreed  on  the  basis  of
evidence of two witness examined for the plaintiff when	 the
appellant was ex parte.
    On	appeal,	 District  Judge concurred  with  the  trial
court's	 view  that the application for	 setting  aside	 the
dismissal  order and the ex parte order was barred by  time,
but set aside the decree holding that the decree was not  in
accordance  with  law  and not executable for  a  number  of
						  PG NO 362
						  PG NO 363
reasons and remanded the suit to the trial court for a fresh
disposal,  after  giving an opportunity of hearing  to	both
parties.
    On	remand, the trial court dismissed the suit. It	held
that  the remand order having been upheld, the dismissal  of
the  appellant's  application for setting  aside  the  order
placing	 the appellant ex parte, must be understood to	have
excluded  from the scope of the proceedings on	remand,	 any
entitlement  of appellant to recall the	 witnesses  examined
when  the  appellant was ex parte. The	District  Judge,  in
appeal,	 confirmed  this decision. The High  Court  rejected
appellant's second appeal in limine.
    In the appeal filed before this court, on behalf of	 the
appellant, it was contended that the trial court should have
tried  the suit de-novo by affording an opportunity to	both
the parties to adduce evidence afresh, and that the scope of
the  remand  also  entitled the appellant to  have  the	 two
witnesses  examined earlier for the plaintiff  recalled	 for
cross-examination.
    Allowing the appeal,
    HELD: 1.1 An order, which is appealable under Order	 43,
Civil Procedure Code, if not appealed against, becomes final
and  its correctness is no more open to examination in	view
of s. 105(2) of the Code. [368C]
:
    Nainsingh v. Koonwarjee, [1971] 1 SCR 207 relied on.
    In	the  instant case, the order of remand,	 not  having
been appealed against by either side, had assumed  finality.
Hence the jurisdiction of the trial court was  circumscribed
and fettered by the order of remand. [368E]
    1.2	 It  is true that it would not be  necessary  for  a
party  to  get rid of an order placing him ex parte  if	 the
party  wishes  to  participate in  the	proceedings  at	 any
particular stage onwards, provided that he does not seek  to
be  relegated to the position he would have occupied  if  he
had appeared at the earlier hearing or hearings and does not
seek  to set back: the hands of the clock. lt means that  he
must  accept  all  that has gone before and  be	 content  to
proceed from the stage at which he has come in. [368F]
    Sangram  Singh v. Election Tribunal, Kotah,	 Bhurey	 Lal
Baya,  [1955] 2 SCR 1 and Arjun Singh v Mohindra  Kumar	 and
Ors.,[1964]5 SCR 946 referred to.
						  PG NO 364
    In the present case, however, the appellant did seek  to
set  the hands of the clock backwards and wanted  to  recall
the  witnesses for cross-examination. This was not  possible
having	regard	to  the finality the  order  of	 remand	 had
assumed. [368H]
    2. In a suit for specific performance of an agreement to
sell,  grant  of relief is discretionary.  The	Court  after
consideration	of  all	 relevant  circumstances   must	  be
persuaded  to  exercise	 its  equitable	 and   discretionary
jurisdiction   in  favour  of  specific	  enforcement.	 The
jurisdiction  is subject to all the conditions to which	 all
discretionary jurisdictions are subject. [369A]
    In the instant case, there are certain personal bars  to
relief. Respondent No. 1, who was the plaintiff in the suit,
did  not  enter	 the box and tender  evidence.	The  subject
matter	of the suit is a small piece of property of  68	 sq.
yds.  and  is  said  to be the only  worldly  goods  of	 the
appellant. Therefore having regard to all the  circumstances
of the case and in order that complete justice is done,	 the
decrees	 of  the  courts below are set aside  and  the	suit
remitted for a fresh disposal after affording an opportunity
to both parties to adduce fresh evidence on their respective
sides. Appellant will also be entitled to have the witnesses
examined  in  his absence recalled  for	 cross	examination.
[369B-D]



JUDGMENT:
   CIVlL APPELLATE_ATE JURlSDICTlON: Civil Appeal No.2582 of
1988.
    From the Judgment and Order dated August 6.	 1987 of the
Punjab	and Haryana High Court in Regular Second Appeal	 No.
2569 of 1987.
    A. K. Nag and Ms. Madhu Tewatia for the Appellant.
    K.K. Mohan and Ms. Amita Gupta for the Respondents.
    The following Order of the Court was delivered:
			  ORDER
    Special Leave granted. Arguments heard.
    This  appeal  by  the  unsuccessful	 defendant  who	 has
suffered  decree of specific performance of an agreement  to
sell relating to a piece of immovable property, is  directed
against	 the  order  dated 6.8. 1987 of the  High  Court  of
						  PG NO 365
Punjab	and Haryana in RSA No. 2569 of 1987  dismissings  in
limine, appellant's second appeal.
    2.	Amarjit Singh, Respondent 1, brought the Civil	Suit
No.  3397/82/259.80  in the Court of Sub Judge,	 Ist  Class,
Patiala	 for  specific enforcement of an agreement  to	sell
dated 14.4.1979 said to have been executed in his favour  by
the appellant respecting the suit property. After service of
summons, appellant entered appearance and filed his  written
statement.  But	 on  7.12.1981 he was  placed  ex-parte	 for
"default   of	non-appearance".  On   4.2.1982,   plaintiff
(respondent 1) examined two witnesses on his side. But later
the same day appellant appears to have filed an	 application
presumably  under  Order IX, r. 7 CPC to  have	the  earlier
order dated 7. 12. 1981 placing him ex parte set aside. This
application was dismissed for default on 25.9.1982. On 30.9.
1982  appellant	 filed an unsigned application	for  setting
aside that order of dismissal dated 25.9. 1982 and also	 for
setting	 aside	the order dated 7. 12. 1981 placing  him  ex
parte. This application was dismissed by the trial court  on
25.2. 1983 on the ground that it had not been signed by	 the
appellant.  However,  the  High Court  in  revision  allowed
appellant's prayer and remitted that application for a fresh
disposal,  after affording to the appellant the	 opportunity
to sign that application. Pursuant thereto, that application
was  signed by the appellant on 12. 5. 1983 ; but  on  16.9.
1983 the application was again dismissed by the trial  court
on  the ground that it was barred by time. The	trial  court
took  the view that the date if affixture of  the  signature
was  to	 be  reckoned  as  the	date  of  its  filing	and,
accordingly found it cut of time.
    On	the  same day, the trial court on the basis  of	 the
evidence   the	two  witnesses	examined  earlier  for	 the
plaintiff, decreed the suit.
    3. Against this decree, appellant filed an appeal in the
Court  of  Additional District Judge  Patiala.	The  learned
District  Judge	 appears to have concurred  with  the  trial
court's	 view  that  the application dated  30.9.  1982	 was
barred by time. learned District judge held :
    ".....  For	 all these reasons I agree  with  the  lower
court  that  application  dated 30.9.  1982  was  barred  by
limitation and deserves dismissal on this ground . . . . . .
    The reason for holding that the application was statutu-
barred was that:
    "Application dated 30.9. 1982 was admittedly not  signed
						  PG NO 366
when  it  was  presented in court on that day  but  it	 was
subsequently signed by defendant No.  1 on 12.5. 1983. There
was  no application in the eyes of law on 30.9. 1982  as  it
was  not duly signed by defendant No. 2. It became a  proper
application  only  on  12.5.  1983 when	 it  was  signed  by
defendant No.  1 and so it must be deemed to have been filed
on that date"
    The	 understanding by both the courts of the  directions
of  the	 High Court in the revision  proceedings  permitting
appellant to sign the application may not be a correct	one.
But  that  order was not assailed by the  appellant  in	 the
appropriate proceedings. However, the learned District Judge
set  aside the decree dated  16.9.1985 on some other  ground
and  remitted  the  suit  to the trial	court  for  a  fresh
disposal.  The	operative part of the judgment	dated  14.2.
1986 of the learned District Judge is in the following terms
    ".	... In the result I accept the appeal set aside	 the
judgment and decree passed by the lower court and remand the
case  to  the lower court i.e. court of	 Shri  J.R.  Singla,
which is successor court of the court of Shri G.K. Rai	with
the direction to re-admit the suit under its original number
in the register of civil suits and proceed to determine	 the
suit  afresh in the light of above observations by giving  a
clear  findings according to law as to the suit property  in
respect	 of  which any relief is granted to  the  plaintiff,
nature	of the relief declined or allowed to  the  plaintiff
out of the reliefs prayed for and the conditions subject  to
which decree of specific performance and possession if	any,
is passed and the names of the defendants against whom it is
passed.	 The  lower court shall give proper  opportunity  of
hearing	 to both the parties in accordance with	 law  before
passing afresh decree . . .. .".
    Referring to the need for, and the points which  require
to be decided on, remand the learned District Judge said:
    "I have, however, found that in some other respects	 the
decree	passed by the lower court is not  sustainable  being
not  in conformity with law and not a executable decree	 due
to the number of reasons . . . . .".
						  PG NO 367
    "..... The learned sub-judge has failed to give a  clear
finding	 as  to	 what was the  sale  consideration  for	 the
disputed  transaction  of  sale	 as  entered  into   between
defendant  No. 1 and the plaintiff vide the agreement  dated
14.2.  1979 executed by defendant No. 1 and as to  how	much
consideration had already been paid at the time of agreement
and  what was the amount which remained for payment  and  in
what  manner  and  by what date it was to  be  paid  by	 the
plaintiff to defendant No. 1. The learned Sub-judge did	 not
at  all go into the question as to whether the	property  in
suit was already mortgaged and what was the mortgage  amount
which was payable to the prior mortgagee. He has missed even
to  look  into the admission made by the plaintiff  in	this
regard	in the plaint. Again the lower court has  failed  to
give  any  finding  on	the  prayer  of	 the  plaintiff	 for
possession  of the suit property and as to if it  (sic)	 any
conditions this relief could be granted to him while passing
the  decree  in his favour. No direction was  given  in	 the
impugned decree about the payment of any sale  consideration
under  the agreement in dispute and accordingly no time	 was
fixed for making the said payment as required under rule l2A
of  Order  20 CPC. Plan of the suit property in	 respect  of
which the decree for specific performance has been passed by
the lower court has also not been got proved and referred to
in the decree. In the absence of same, decree must be termed
as vague and in executable .....".
    4. On remand, the trial court dismissed the suit by	 its
judgment  dated	 30.5. 1986. The District  Judge  in  appeal
confirmed  this decree for dismissal. The High Court by	 its
order	dated	6.8.  1987,  now  under	  appeal,   rejected
appellant's second appeal in limine.
    5.	Appellant's  main grievance in this appeal  is	that
pursuant  to  and  in terms of the  order  of  remand  dated
l4.2.1986  the trial court.  should have tried the suit	 de-
novo  by  affording an opportunity to both  the	 parties  to
adduce evidence afresh and that the scope of the remand also
entitled  appellant  to	 have  the  two	 witnesses  examined
earlier	 for the plaintiff recalled for	 cross	examination.
The trial court however understood the order of remand dated
14.2.1986 differently. lt held that the order having  upheld
the  dismissal	of the appellant's application	for  setting
aside	the  order,  placing  appellant	 ex-parte  must	  be
understood  to have clearly excluded from the scope  of	 the
proceedings  on	 remand,  any entitlement  of  appellant  to
recall	the witnesses examined at a time when appellant	 was
ex-parte.
						  PG NO 368
    This  view	of the trial court as to the  scope  of	 the
proceedings  on remand was endorsed by the  first  appellate
court  and  must be held to have been approved by  the	High
Court. Appellant assails its correctness here.
    6. Appellant's entitlement to adduce fresh evidence	 and
to have plaintiff's witnesses recalled for cross-examination
turns upon and is circumscribed by the order of remand.	 The
order  of  remand dated 14.2.1986 not having  been  appealed
against by either side had assumed finality. As observed  by
this  court in Nain SINGH v. Koonwarjee, [1971] SCR  207  an
order,	which  is  appealable under order  43  CPC,  if	 not
appealed  against, becomes final and its correctness  is  no
more  open  to	examination in view  of	 the  provisions  of
Section	 105 [2] of the Code which provides that  where	 any
party, aggrieved by an order of remand from which an  appeal
lies  ,	 does not appeal therefrom he  shall  thereafter  be
precluded  from disputing its correctness. It is  true	that
the  correctness of the view taken by the District-Judge  in
the course of the remand order that the date of the  signing
of  the application and not the date of its  initial  filing
was  the relevant date for purposes of reckoning  limitation
is open to doubt in the light cf. the directions of the High
Court  permitting application to sign that application.	 But
that  order of remand, as stated earlier. was  not  appealed
against	 by the appellant. The trial court was right in	 its
view  that its jurisdiction on remand was circumscribed	 and
fettered by the terms of the order of remand.
    The appeal to the principle in Sangram Singh v. Election
Tribunal  Kotah,  Bhurey  Lal Baya, [1955]  SCR	 1,  in	 the
circumstances is not much of assistance to the appellant. It
is  true that it would not be necessary for a party  to	 get
rid of an order placing him ex parte if the party wishes  to
participate  in	 the  proceedings at  any  particular  stage
onwards,  provided that he does not seek to be relegated  to
the  position he would have occupied if he had	appeared  at
the  earlier  hearing or hearings and does not seek  to	 set
back the: hands of the	clock. It means than he must  accept
all that has gone before and be content to proceed from	 the
stage  at  which he has come in. [See also: Arjun  Singh  v.
Mohindra Kumar and Ors., [1964] 5 SCR 946].  In the  present
case appellant did seek to set the hands of the clock  back-
wards;	he  wanted the witnesses to be	recalled  for  cross
examination. This, unfortunately was not permissible  having
regard to the finality the order of remand had assumed.
						  PG NO 369
    7.	 But  that  does not appear to be  the	end  of	 the
matter.	 This  is  a  suit for specific	 performance  on  an
agreement to sell. The grant of relief is discretionary. The
after  consideration of all relevant  circumstances must  be
persuaded  to  exercise	 its  equitable	 and   discretionary
jurisdiction   in  favour  of  specific	  enforcement.	 The
jurisdiction is subject to all title conditions to which all
discretionary  jurisdictions are subject. There are  certain
personal bars to relief. Respondent-l, who was the plaintiff
in the suit, did not enter the box and tender evidence.	 The
subject	 matter of the suit is a small piece of property  of
68 Sq. yds. and is said to be the only worldly goods of	 the
appellant.
    Having  regard to all the circumstances of the case	 and
in  order   that complete justice is done,  the	 order	that
commends itself as  appropriate is to set aside the  decrees
of the courts below and remit the suit for a fresh  disposal
after  affording an opportunity to both	 parties  to  adduce
fresh  evidence on their respective sides. Appellant   shall
also  be  entitled  to have the witnesses  examined  in	 his
absence recalled for cross examination
    The relief we grant might look a little over-liberal: we
think that the appellant should have another opportunity  to
have  his case put-forward and examined on the merits.	This
is done by compensating the first-respondent as to an  costs
which  we  determine at a sum of Rs. 1,000  which  appellant
shall  pay to the first respondent in the trial court  after
the suit goes back before it.
    8.	Accordingly, the appeal is allowed. the	 decree;  of
the courts  below set aside and the suit is remitted to	 the
trial court to be  re-registered in its original number	 and
disposed .of in accordance with law and in the light of	 the
observations made in the course of this judgment.  Both	 the
parties	 are  directed to appear before the trial  court  of
30th  of September 1988, for further proceeding in the	suit
on  remand  without  the requirement  of  service  of  fresh
notices	 to them from the trial court in this  behalf.	 The
trial  court  is  directed to call this matter	on  30th  of
September 1988, for this purpose.
N.P.V.
			      Appeal allowed




