

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Collector Of Central Excise, ... vs Indian Oxygen Ltd on 2 August, 1988Equivalent citations: 1988 AIR 1873, 1988 SCR  Supl. (1) 761
Author: S Mukharji
Bench: Mukharji, Sabyasachi (J)
           PETITIONER:
COLLECTOR OF CENTRAL EXCISE, MADRAS

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
INDIAN OXYGEN LTD.

DATE OF JUDGMENT02/08/1988

BENCH:
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)
BENCH:
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)
SHARMA, L.M. (J)

CITATION:
 1988 AIR 1873		  1988 SCR  Supl. (1) 761
 1988 SCC  (4) 139	  JT 1988 (3)	334
 1988 SCALE  (2)599
 CITATOR INFO :
 E&R	    1990 SC1676	 (11)


ACT:
     Central Excises  And Salt	Act, 1944:  Section 4(1) (a)
and  35L(b)-Manufacturer  of  dissolved	 acetylene  gas	 and
compressed oxygen  gas-For purposes of supply-Rental Charged
for  cylinders-Interest	  paid	on   deposits	taken	from
customers-Charges on  account  of  rental  and	interest  on
deposits-Whether relatable to cost of 'manufacture'.



HEADNOTE:
     The respondent  firm  are	manufacturers  of  dissolved
acetylene gas and compressed oxygen gas. They were supplying
these gases  in cylinders  at their factory gate. For taking
delivery some  consumers/ customers  used to bring their own
cylinders and  take the	 delivery. Others,  used to have the
delivery in  the cylinders  supplied by the respondent firm.
For the	 purpose of such supply of cylinders certain rentals
were charged  by the  firm, and	 also to  ensure that  these
cylinders are  returned, a certain amount as deposit used to
be taken  from the  customers. On  these  deposits  notional
interest at 18 percent per annum was calculated.
     The  Central   Excise  Authorities	  issued  show-cause
notices to  the respondent  on the  ground that the notional
income on  the deposit	of cylinders and the rental are part
of the	assessable-value, and  hence should  be included  in
computing  the	 assessable  value.   In  their	  reply	 the
respondent stated  that the  deposits from  the buyers	were
only  to  ensure  return  of  the  gas	cylinders  from	 the
customers.
     The Assistant  Collector by  his order  dated 3rd June,
1965 held  that the respondent had to pay excise duty on the
interest earned	 at 18% during the relevant period, and that
as the	respondent had suppressed this fact from the revenue
during the  past 5  years, the	amount	was  includible	 and
recoverable under  Rule 8  read	 with  Section	11A  of	 the
Central Excises	 and Salt  Act. He also included the rentals
of the cylinders in the value.
     In	 appeal	 the  Collector	 upheld	 the  order  of	 the
Assistant Collector but with certain modifications.
762
     The respondent  appealed to the Central Excise and Gold
Control Appellate  Tribunal, which  allowed the	 appeal, and
held that the charge on account of rentals for the cylinders
and the	 interest which	 accrued  on  the  deposit  for	 the
cylinder are not relatable to the cost of manufacture of the
goods, and therefore under Section 4 deleted from the value,
rentals for the cylinders and the interest on the deposit.
     In the appeals to this Court it was contended on behalf
of the	Revenue that  there are	 two  different	 classes  of
buyers, one  class who	brings their  own cylinders, and the
others who  get their  supply through  the cylinders  of the
suppliers, and that different rates for these two classes of
buyers constitute two different markets and are contemplated
and permissible,  under the first proviso to Section 4(1)(a)
of the Act.
     Dismissing the Appeals,
^
     HELD: 1.  Section 4(1)(a) proviso can be of no avail to
the Revenue.  There may	 be different  classes of buyers for
different classes  of goods.  In the  instant case,  if	 the
respondent company  sold the  gases to	different classes of
buyers then  different prices  may be  charged. If the gases
had been  sold to  different classes  of buyers at different
rates, it  is possible that there might be different markets
for the	 same. The charges like rental for the cylinders and
the notional  interest income  are for	ancillary or  allied
services and  that is not an activity of manufacture. [766A-
B]
     Union of  India &	Ors. v.	 Bombay	 Tyre  International
Ltd., [1984]  1 SCR  347 and  Asstt.  Collector	 of  Central
Excise v.  Madras Rubber  Factory Ltd., [1986] Supp SCC 751,
referred to.
     2. It  is well  settled that  levy	 under	the  Central
Excises Salt Act is on manufacture. In the instant case, the
sale is	 of gases.  The levy  is on the manufacture of gases
and the excisable goods are these gases. [764G,H]
     3. Gas  being a commodity of peculiar nature, has to be
delivered  by	cylinders,  but	 these	cylinders  might  be
supplied either	 by the supplier as an ancillary activity or
brought by the consumers or purchasers at their own risk and
cost. For  purchasers  taking  it  in  their  own  cylinders
supplied by  them, there was no charge for them. This is not
an activity  for the manufacture of gases. This is ancillary
to it but not incidental. [765C]
     In the  instant case, there are two different supplies.
One is supply
763
of gases  and the other is an incidental supply of cylinders
on rent.  The interest notional or real accruing on deposits
for the safe return of cylinders as well as the rental would
not constitute	part of	 the assessable-value.	The Tribunal
was right in the view it took. [766C-D]



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal Nos. 2349-61
of 1988.
     From the order dated 8.7.1987 of the Customs Excise and
Gold Control  Appellate Tribunal,  New Delhi  in Appeal Nos.
E/l583 to  l589/ 86-A  and 1533,  1521, 1528, 1529-31/1986-A
and order No. 491 to 503 of 1987.
     A.K. Ganguli,  Mrs. Indu  Malhotra and Mrs. Sushma Suri
for the Appellant.
     Soli J.  Sorabji, M.  Chandrasekharan Mrs. V.J. Francis
and N.M. Popli for the Respondent.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     SABYASACHI MUKHARJI, J. These appeals are under Section
35L,(b) of the Central Excises & Salt Act, 1944 (hereinafter
called 'the  Act') directed  against  the  decision  of	 the
Customs Excise (Gold) Control Appellate Tribunal, New Delhi,
(hereinafter called 'the CEGAT').
     The respondent  M/s. Indian oxygen Ltd., Visakhapatnam,
are manufacturers  of dissolved acetylene gas and campressed
oxygen gas  (hereinafter called 'the gases'). The respondent
was supplying  these gases  in cylinders  at  their  factory
gate.	For   taking   delivery	  of   these   gases,	some
consumers/customers used  to bring  their own  cylinders and
take the delivery, while others used to have the delivery in
the cylinders supplied by the respondent. For the purpose of
such supply  of cylinders,  certain rentals  were charged by
the respondent	and also  to ensure that these cylinders are
returned properly,  certain amount  of deposit	used  to  be
taken  from   the  customers.  On  those  deposits  notional
interest @  18% per  annum was calculated. These two amounts
with which  we are  concerned, namely,	the rentals  of	 the
cylinders and the notional interest earned on the deposit of
cylinders, are	the subject-matters  of the  dispute herein.
Whether these two amounts were includible in the value under
Section 4 of the Act, is the question. The revenue's case is
that the notional income on deposit of
764
cylinders and  the rental  are part  of the  asessable-value
and, hence,  should be included in computing the assessable-
value. The  respondent, however,  disputed  that.  They	 had
neither included such rentals nor the interest received from
the buyers  in the price list for the assessment. Therefore,
the revenue  issued show-cause notices to the respondent. In
their reply  the respondent  stated that  the deposits	from
buyers were  only to  ensure return of the gas clinders from
the customers.
     The Asstt.	 Collector Central Excise, Visakhapatnam, by
an order  dated 3.6.1965 held that the respondent had to pay
excise-duty on the interest earned @ 18% during the relevant
period. He  further  held  that	 since	the  respondent	 had
suppressed this	 fact from the revenue, in the past 5 years,
under Rule  8 read  with Section  11A of  the Act, these are
includible. He	also included the rentals of these cylinders
in the value. On an appeal, the Collector of Central Excise,
Madras, upheld the said order with certain modifications.
     Dissatisfied  with	  the  aforesaid,   the	 respondents
appealed to  the CEGAT.	 In  its  order	 under	appeal,	 the
Tribunal observed, inter alia, as follows:
	  "As regards  charge on  account of  rental for the
	  cylinders  and   the	interest  which	 accrues  on
	  account of  deposit receipts	for  the  supply  of
	  gases	 in   returnable  cylinders,   we  are	 not
	  persuaded that  either of these charges is related
	  to the cost of manufacture of the goods as such."
     The Tribunal,  therefore, under  Section 4 deleted from
the value,  rentals for	 the cylinders	and  interest  which
accrued on  account of	deposit receipts  for the  supply of
gases. Hence, this appeal by the Collector.
     It is  well-settled that  the levy under the Act, is on
the manufacture.  Under Section	 4(1)(a) of the Act, excise-
duty is	 chargeable on any excisable goods with reference to
value, such  value shall, subject to the other provisions of
this Section, be deemed to be the normal price thereof, that
is to say, the price at which such goods are ordinarily sold
by the	assessee to a buyer in the course of wholesale trade
for delivery  at the  time and	place of  removal, where the
buyer is  not a	 related person	 and the  price is  the sole
consideration for  the sale.  Here the sale is of the gases.
The levy  is on	 the manufacture  of gases and the excisable
goods are these gases.
765
     The scope of Section 4 has been explained by this Court
in Union  of India & ors. v. Bombay Tyre International Ltd.,
[1984] 1  SCR 347  as well  as the  ramifications thereof in
Asstt. Collector  of Central Excise v. Madras Rubber Factory
Ltd., [19861  Supp SCC	751. In	 the light  of the aforesaid
principles it has to be borne in mind that the supply of gas
cylinders is  ancillary to  the supply	of gases  but it  is
strictly not incidental thereto because there are classes of
persons who  can take delivery of these gases without supply
of cylinders  by  the  respondent  and	in  those  cases  no
question of  charging rental  nor interest on those deposits
for cylinders,	would arise. It is true that the gas being a
commodity  of  peculiar	 nature,  had  to  be  delivered  in
cylinders but  these cylinders	might be  supplied either by
the supplier  as an  ancillary activity	 or brought  by	 the
consumer or  purchasers at  their own  risk  and  cost.	 For
purchasers taking  it in  their own  cylinders	supplied  by
them, there  was no charge for them. This is not an activity
for the	 manufacture of	 gases. This  is ancillary to it but
not incidental.	 Any income  either in the shape of interest
on deposits,  notional or real, may be earned on the deposit
for the	 safe return  of cylinders,  or any  rental would be
though	ancillary  but	would  not  be	the  price  for	 the
manufacture. These might be profits or gains, if any, of any
ancillary or  allied venture.  If that is the true position,
then on	 the principle under Section 4(1)(a) of the Act, the
Tribunal was  right in	excluding these	 two  amounts  while
computing the value of the excisable goods.
     Mr. A.K.  Ganguli, learned	 counsel appearing  for	 the
revenue, sought	 to  urge  before  us  that  there  are	 two
different classes  of buyers,  one class  of such buyers was
who used to bring their own cylinders and the others used to
get their  supplies through  the cylinders of the suppliers.
According to  him, different  rates for these two classes of
buyers., in  fact, constitute  two different markets and are
permissible. This,  according to  him, is contemplated under
the first proviso to Section 4(1)(a) of the Act, which reads
as follows:
	  "(i) where, in accordance with the normal practice
	  of the  wholesale trade  in such goods, such goods
	  are sold  by the  assessee at	 different prices to
	  different classes  of buyers	(not  being  related
	  persons) each	 such price  shall, subject  to	 the
	  existence of	the other circumstances specified in
	  clause (a),  be deemed  to be	 the normal price of
	  such goods  in relation  to  each  such  class  of
	  buyers.'
     There may	be different classes of buyers for different
classes of goods. Section 4(1)(a) of the Act emphasises that
if the goods is of the
766
same type,  the prices	should also be the same. The proviso
to the said Section postulates that where in accordance with
normal practice	 such goods,  namely, the  gases are sold to
different classes  of buyers  then different  prices may  be
charged. If  gases had	been sold  to different	 classes  of
buyers at  different rates,  it is possible that there might
be different markets for the same. But here the charges like
rentals for  the cylinders and the notional interest income,
are for	 ancillary or  allied services	and that  is not  an
activity of  manufacture. Hence, Section 4(1)(a) proviso can
be of no avail to the renenue.
     It is  a case  of two different supplies. One is supply
of gases and the other is incidental supply of cylinders for
rent. In  that view  of the  matter,  in  our  opinion,	 the
Tribunal was  right in	the  view  it  took.  The  interest,
notional or  real, accruing  on deposits for the safe return
of cylinders  as well  as the  rentals would  not constitute
part of the assessable-value.
     In the  aforesaid view  of the  matter the order of the
Tribunal needs	no interference.  The appeals,	accordingly,
fail and are dismissed There will be no order as to costs.
N.V.K.				     Appeals dismissed.




