

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Neelakantan & Bros. Construction vs Superintending Engineer, ... on 16 August, 1988Equivalent citations: 1988 AIR 2045, 1988 SCR  Supl. (2) 462
Author: S Mukharji
Bench: Mukharji, Sabyasachi (J)
           PETITIONER:
NEELAKANTAN & BROS. CONSTRUCTION

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER, NATIONAL HIGHWAYS,SALEM & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT16/08/1988

BENCH:
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)
BENCH:
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)
RANGNATHAN, S.

CITATION:
 1988 AIR 2045		  1988 SCR  Supl. (2) 462
 1988 SCC  (4) 462	  JT 1988 (3)	743
 1988 SCALE  (2)586


ACT:
    Arbitration	 Act,  1940:  Sections 2,  20,	30  and	 33-
Arbitration-  Statements of parties filed-Evidence  adduced-
Change	 of   Arbitrator  -Parties  did	 not   protest	 and
participate in proceedings before successor-Whether  amounts
to  acquiescence-Appointment  of  successor-Whether  can  be
challenged  as invalidating  proceedings_Award-Unreasoned-No
legal proposition made-Whether can be interfered with.



HEADNOTE:
    The petitioner-Construction firm entered into agreements
with  respondent No. 3, Superintending Engineer of a  Circle
for  execution	of certain civil works.	 Respondent  No.  1-
Superintending	Engineer  of another Circle entered  into  a
reference  for arbitration and parties filed statements	 and
adduced	 evidence.  Before the adjudication  was  completed,
respondent No. 1 was transferred and his successor-in-office
entered	 into the task of adjudication with  the  knowledge,
consent	 and active participation of the petitioner  in	 the
proceeding.  Since  the arbitrator could  not  complete	 the
award  within time, be sought extension of time by a  letter
to  the	 petitioner  and  the  petitioner  agreed  to	such
extension  by a letter. The petitioner did not ask  for	 any
further	 or  fresh opportunity for  adducing  any  evidence.
Thereafter, the arbitrator made his award.
    The petitioner challenged the award under ss. 30 and  33
of  the Arbitration Act, 1940 before the District  Judge  on
the ground that the previous arbitrator having entered	into
reference,  his successor-in-office had no  jurisdiction  to
conclude  it  and the award was violative of  principles  of
natural justice.
    The District Judge held that the successor-in-office  to
the  original  arbitrator was competent to pass	 the  award.
Upholding this, the High Court rejected the challenge to the
award. Hence the petitioner filed the Special Leave Petition
in this Court contending that once an arbitrator had entered
into a reference, the next incumbent could not conclude	 the
said arbitration proceedings without a fresh agreement, that
there  was  violation of principles of natural	justice	 and
						  PG NO 462
						  PG NO 463
that the award was bad.
    Dismissing the Special Leave Petition,
    HELD:  1. If the parties to the reference  either  agree
before,hand  to	 the method of	appointment,  or  afterwards
acquiesce  in the appointment made, with full  knowledge  of
all the circumstances, they will be precluded from objecting
to such. appointment as invalidating subsequent proceedings.
Attending  and	taking	part in the  proceedings  with	full
knowledge   of	the  relevant  fact  will  amount  to	such
acquiescence [465G ]
    N.	Challappan  v. Secretary, Kerala  State	 Electricity
Board and another, [1975] 1 S.C.C. 289 relied on.
    Chowdhury Murtaza Hossein v. Mussumat Bibi	Bechunnissa,
3  I.A.	 209  and Prasun Roy v.	 The  Calcutta	Metropolitan
Development  Authority	and  another, [1982]  2	 Scale	125,
referred to.
    Russell on Arbitration, 18th Edition/20th Edition, pages
105/432-435, referred to.
    In	the instant case, the petitioner had full  knowledge
of  the	 change	 of the incumbent and did  not	protest	 and
proceedings  went  on before the new  incumbent.  Thus,	 the
petitioner  had	 knowledge  of the alleged  defect  and	 had
acquiesced  in the proceedings before the  successor.  There
was,  therefore,  no  violation	 of  principles	 of  natural
justice. [465C, F]
    2.	Unless there was a patent mistake of law  and  gross
misstatement of facts resulting in miscarriage of justice or
of equity, the award remains unassailable. [466C]
    Champsey  Bhara & Company v. Jivraj Ballo  Spinning	 and
Weaving	 Company  Ltd.,	 50  I.A.  324	and  Firm   Madanlal
Roshanlal Mahajan v. Hukumchand Mills Ltd., lndore, [1967j 1
S.C.R. 105, referred to.
    In	the instant case, the arbitrator gave no reason	 for
the award. There is no legal proposition which is the  basis
of  the	 award,	 far less any  legal  proposition  which  is
erroneous.  There  is  no appeal from  the  verdict  of	 the
arbitrator.    The    Court   cannot   review,	  in	such
circumstances,the  award  and  correct any  mistake  in	 the
adjudication by the arbitrator. [466D]
						  PG NO 464
    3. In the facts and circumstances of the case, the award
is  unassailable. The High Court was right in upholding	 the
District  Judge's dismissal of the challenge to	 the  award.
[466F]



JUDGMENT:
    CIVIL  APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Special  Leave  Petition
[Civil) Nos. 1 l(i50-58 of 1987.
    From  the  Judgment and Order dated 3 1.7. 1987  of	 the
Madras	High Court in Appeal against Order Nos. 54 1 to	 544
and 558 to 562 of 1981.
    A.K.  Sen, V. Krishnamurthy and V. Balachandran for	 the
Petitioner.
    A. V. Rangam for the Respondents.
    The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
    SABYASACHI	MUKHARJI,  J.  These  are  petitions   under
Article	 136  of the Constitution seeking  leave  to  appeal
against	 the judgment and order of the High Court of  Madras
dated 31st July,  1987. The petitioner company undertook the
work  of  widening  and strengthening  pavements  in  Nation
Highway	 No. 7, Madurai-Kanya-kumari Road from Reaches	37.6
k.m.  to '1', k.m. on the Madurai-Kanyakumari Road  and	 the
work  was  divided  into fourteen Reaches  and	14  separate
agreements were entered into between the petitioner and	 the
Superintending	Engineer,  National  Highways,	Tirunelveli.
respondent No. 3 to the present petitions. There is not much
dispute	 on this point. At the relevant time, according	 to,
the   petitioner,  the	Superintending	Engineer.   National
Highways,  Salem  was  one  Thiru  Mohan.  He  entered	into
reference. He took up the matter for arbitration and  called
for  statements	 from  the parties.  Statements	 were  filed
before	him and evidence were also adduced before  him.	 But
before he could complete the adjudication he was transferred
and   was   succeeded	by   one   Thiru   J.R.	  Cornelius,
Superintending Engineer. The contention of the petitioner in
this  case was that he had no Jurisdiction to,	proceed	 and
complete  the  arbitration.  It	 appears  however,  that  he
entered into the task of adjudication with the knowledge and
consent	  of   the  petitioner	and   the   petitioner	 had
participated actively in the proceeding before him. From the
notices served by Thiru Mohan previously and subsequently by
Thiru  Cornelius.  it is apparent that	the  petitioner	 had
knowledge   of	 the  change  of  the	incumbent   of	 the
Superintending Engineer who was to arbitrate in the  matter.
This  is evident from the documents appearing at  pages	 164
						  PG NO 465
and  165 of the present paper book and both the parties	 had
notice of the succession in office. The arbitrator could not
complete  the  award  within time and  there  was  need	 for
extension  of time. He wrote a letter to the  petitioner  on
lst  May  1977 stating "extension of time was  necessary  to
pass orders on reference and hearing has been concluded". In
reply to that fetter on 11th May, 1977 the petitioner agreed
to  such  extension. The petitioner was	 content  with	that
situation   and	 never	asked  for  any	 further  or   fresh
opportunity  either to make any submission or to adduce	 any
evidence.  In that light the arbitrator has made the  award.
This  was  challenged before the learned District  Judge  by
means of a suit under sections 30 and 33 of the	 Arbitration
Act,  1940 that the previous arbitrator Thiru  Mohan  having
entered	  into	 reference  and	  Thiru	  Cornelius   had-no
jurisdiction to conclude. It was violative of the principles
of  natural   justice, it was submitted.  But  as  mentioned
hereinbefore, the petitioner had knowledge of the change  of
the  incumbent. He did not protest and the proceedings	went
on before Thiru Cornelius. It is apparent from the terms  of
the  agreement between the parties that	 the  Superintending
Engineer  of  the Circle for the time being  was  the  named
arbitrator.  The  learned  District Judge  held	 that  Thiru
Cornelius  was competent to pass the award. The	 High  Court
also upheld that and rejected the challenge to the award  on
this ground made by the petitioner.
    Shri  A.K.	Sen, learned counsel  for  the	petitioners,
urged  before  us that once an arbitrator had  entered	into
reference,  the next incumbent could not conclude  the	said
arbitration  proceeding	 without a fresh agreement.  In	 the
facts  of this case, as the petitioner had knowledge of	 the
alleged defect and had acquiesced in the proceedings  before
the  successor,	 namely,  Thiru Cornelius;  we	are  of	 the
c,pinion,  that	 this	contention of  Shri  Sen  cannot  be
entertained.  It was contended that there was  violation  of
the principles of natural justice. This objection cannot  be
entertained.  If the parties to the reference  either  agree
beforehand  to	the  method of	appointment,  or  afterwards
acquiescence  in the appointment made with full knowledge of
all   the  circumstances.  they	 will  be   precluded	from
objection~  to such appointment as  invalidating  subsequent
proceedings.  Attending and taking part in  the	 proceedings
with full knowledge of the relevant fact will amount to such
acquiescence, explains Russell on Arbitration. 18th  Edition
at page	 105. This was stated by the Judicial Committee long
ago   in   Chowdhury  Murtaza  Hossein	v.   Mussumat	Bibi
Bechunnissa,  3 I.A. 209. See also the observations of	P.B.
Mukherji, J.  in the  decision of  the Calcutta	 High Court
						  PG NO 466
Calcutta,  A.I.R. 1456 Calcutta 470 at 472. This Court	held
in  N.	Challappan v. Secretary,  Kerala  State	 Electricity
Board  and  another, [1975] 1 S.C.C. 289  that	acquiescence
defeated  the right of the appellant at a latter stage.	 See
also  the  observations of this Court in Prasun Roy  v.	 The
Calcutta  Metropolitan	Development Authority  and  another,
[1982]	2  Scale  125.	See  Russell  on  Arbitration,	20th
Edition,  pages 432-435. Shri Sen contended that  no  notice
was issued after the appointment of the new arbitrator. This
was  factually incorrect, as mentioned before. Then, it	 was
said  that the award was bad as it did not consider all	 the
claims. This also cannot be entertained. It must be  assumed
that the arbitrator had considered all the evidence  adduced
before him. There was no disregard of any principle of	law.
There  was nothing to indicate that the arbitrator  had	 not
considered  all	 the  evidence. Unless there  was  a  patent
mistake of law and gross misstatement of facts resulting  in
miscarriage  of	 justice  or of equity,	 the  award  remains
unassailable. In this case the arbitrator gave no reason for
the award. There is no legal proposition which is the  basis
of  the	 award,	 far less any  legal  proposition  which  is
erroneous.  There  is  no appeal from  the  verdict  of	 the
arbitrator. The Court cannot review, in such  circumstances,
the award and correct any mistake in the adjudication by the
arbitrator-See	Champsey  Bhara B Company  v.  Jivray  Ballo
Spinning  and  Weaving	Company Ltd., 50 I.A.  324  and	 the
observations  of  Bachawat, J.	in Firm	 Madanlal  Roshanlal
Mahajan v. Hukumchand Mills Ltd., Indore, [ l967] 1 S. C. R.
105 of this Court.
    In	the  facts  and circumstances of the  case,  in	 our
opinion,  this award is not assailable. The High Court	was,
therefore,  right in upholding the learned District  judge's
dismissal  of the challenge to the award.  These  petitions,
therefore,  fail and are dismissed accordingly ,without	 any
order as to costs.
    N.P.V.				Petitions dismissed.




