

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Commissioner Of Sales Tax, U.P vs Rai Bharat Das & Bros on 30 August, 1988Equivalent citations: 1989 AIR  315, 1988 SCR  Supl. (2) 685
Author: S Mukharji
Bench: Mukharji, Sabyasachi (J)
           PETITIONER:
COMMISSIONER OF SALES TAX, U.P.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
RAI BHARAT DAS & BROS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT30/08/1988

BENCH:
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)
BENCH:
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)
KANIA, M.H.

CITATION:
 1989 AIR  315		  1988 SCR  Supl. (2) 685
 1989 SCC  (1) 143	  JT 1988 (4)	  3
 1988 SCALE  (2)1073


ACT:
  Central  Sales Tax Act, 1956: s. 2(h)--Packing  expenses
incurred  on putting the goods in deliverable  state-Whether
could be included in sale price-Whether exigible to tax.



HEADNOTE:
    Section  2(h)  of  the  Central  Sales  Tax	 Act,	1956
contemplates sale price as the consideration for the sale of
any goods, inclusive of any sum charged for anything done by
the dealer in respect of the goods at the time of or  before
the delivery thereof, other than cost of freight or delivery
and cash discount.
    The assessee carried on the business of mining and	sale
of silica sand. The sales tax authorities sought to levy tax
on  the	 packing  charges  that he  had	 received  from	 the
purchasers.  The  Tribunal found that there was	 an  implied
agreement  for	sending	 silica	 in  gunny  bags,  that	 the
expenses on packing were incurred in order to put the  goods
in  deliverable	 state	prior to the  delivery,	 that  these
expenses  were rightly included in the sale price and  hence
exigible to tax.
    The	 High  Court came to the conclusion that  since	 the
Tribunal had not recorded the finding that there was implied
agreement  to  sell the gunny bags by the  assessee  to	 its
customers,  the packing charges were mentioned and not	cost
of  gunny bags and since the price of goods and the  packing
charges were separately charged the said charges could	 not
be included in the sale price paid by the purchasers to	 the
assessee.
    Allowing the appeal by special leave,
    HELD :  The High Court was in error in the view it took.
[689B]
    Whether  there is an implied agreement to  sell  packing
material along with the product contained therein is a	pure
question  of fact depending upon the circumstances  of	each
case.  In  the	instant case the  Tribunal  found  that	 the
packing in the gunny bags was done by the dealer in  respect
of the goods at the time of or before the delivery  thereof,
that  it  was  done at the request of buyers  as  it  was  a
						  PG NO 686
convenient  mode of delivery and that the buyers  had  given
directions  for	 the quality of packing. In  view  of  these
facts  found  by  the Tribunal, which must be  taken  to  be
conclusive,  it could not be said that the parties  did	 not
intend to sell or buy the gunny bags. [687E-G]
    In	view  of  the  definition of s.	 2(h)  of  the	Act,
anything  which was integral part including any sum  charged
for anything done by the dealer in respect of the goods, may
form  part  but anything supplied separately pursuant  to  a
separate   order,  directions  or  specifications   to	 the
purchaser  could  not form part of the sale  price.  In	 the
instant	 case the packing was done in order to	putting	 the
goods in deliverable state and incidental to the same.	Such
packing charges, therefore, could be included. The mere fact
that  price of silica was shown separately and the  cost  of
packing was also shown separately makes no difference to the
assessment of sales tax. [688D,F-G]
    Commissioner  of  Taxes, Assam v. Prabhat Marketing	 Co.
Ltd.,  19  STC 84 and Jamanu Flour ,e Oil Mill (P)  Ltd.  v.
State of Bihar,65 STC 462 applied.



JUDGMENT:
    CIVIL  APPELLATE JURISDICTlON: Civil Appeal No. 2456  of
1986.
    From  the  Judgment and Order dated 12.7.  1982  of	 the
Allahabad High Court in Sales Tax Revision No. 42 of 1982.
    S.C.   Manchanda  and  Ashok  K.  Srivastava   for	 the
Appellant.
    The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
    SABYASACHl MUKHARJI, J. This is an appeal by leave	from
the judgment and order of the High Court of Allahabad, dated
12th July, 1982. The decision was rendered in a revision  by
the  assessee  which was directed against the order  of	 the
Sales Tax Tribunal. The year involved is the assessment year
1974-75.
    The assessee carried on the business of mining and	sale
of silica sand. The question was whether the sales tax could
be  charged from the assessee in respect of packing  charges
received  by the assessee from the purchaser. The sales	 tax
authorities  as well as the Tribunal held that the  assessee
was  liable to pay sales tax on the packing charges that  he
had received from the purchaser. From the facts found by the
Tribunal  it appears that there was a contract	for  packing
						  PG NO 687
the  silica sand in gunny bags and packing charges had	been
realised  on  the  basis  of  mt.  tons	 though	 these	were
separately  shown  and were added up with the price  of	 the
silica sand and on the total sales tax was charged.
    Section  2(h)  of  the  Central  Sales  Tax	 Act,	1956
(hereinafter   called	`the  Act')  provide   as   follows:
"sale  price"  means  the  amount payable  to  a  dealer  as
consideration  for  the	 sale of any  goods,  less  any	 sum
allowed as cash discount according to the practice normally'
prevailing  the trade, but inclusive of any sum charged	 for
anything  done by the dealer in respect of the goods at	 the
time  of or before the delivery thereof other than the	cost
of freight or delivery or the cost of installation in  cases
where such cost	 is separately charged. "
    The	 tribunal  categorically  found	 that  there  was  a
contract  for packing the silica sand in sound	gunny  bags,
hence,held  that there was an implied agreement for  sending
silica	in  gunny bags though these could be sent  loose  in
wagons. As mentioned hereinbefore, Section 2(h) contemplates
sale  price as the consideration for the sale of  any  goods
unless	any  sum allowed as cash discount according  to	 the
practice  prevailing in the trade, but inclusive of any	 sum
charged	 for anything done by the dealer in respect  of	 the
goods at the time before the delivery thereof other than the
cost  of freight or delivery or the cost of installation  in
cases  where  such cost is separately  charged.	 Hence,	 the
short question is whether the price was charged for anything
thing done in respect of the goods at the time of or  before
the delivery thereof.
    The	 Tribunal  also found that packing was done  at	 the
request	 of the buyer and that it was a convenient  mode  of
delivery. The buyers had given directions for the quality of
packing and it appears from the order form this always	done
in  respect  of the goods for putting these  in	 deliverable
state	and  so	 the  packing  charges,	 according  to	 the
Tribunal,are  exigible	to tax in  this	 case.	The-Tribunal
clearly	 came to the conclusion that all the these  expenses
were incurred in order to put the goods in deliverable state
prior to their delivery. As per the agreement these expenses
were rightly included in the sale price and it could not  be
said  that these were not part of the sale price. Hence	 the
Tribunal held that the tax was rightly levied under the	 Act
on the sale price so computed.
						  PG NO 688
    The High Court came to the conclusion that the  Tribunal
had  not  recorded  the finding that there  was	 an  implied
agreement  to  sell the gunny bags by the  assessee  to	 its
customers.  Packing charges were	 mentioned  and	 not
the cost of gunny bags. Packing charges for each  metric ton
obviously  include labour charges. In view of the fact	that
the  price of goods and the packing charges were  separately
charged,  the  High Court came- to the conclusion  that	 the
packing charges could not be included in the sale price paid
by the purchasers to the assessee. That is impugned in	this
appeal.
    We are of the opinion, in view of the facts found by the
Tribunal  which must be taken to be conclusive, and  in	 the
light  of  Section 2(h) of the Act, the High  Court  was  in
error. In the facts of this case such packing charges  could
be included. There was an agreement to sell the gunny  bags,
as  found  by the Tribunal. The price of  silica  was  shown
separately   and  the  cost  of	 packing  was	also   shown
separately. In view of the definition of Section 2(h) of the
Act,  anything which was an integral part included  any	 sum
charged	 for anything done by the dealer in respect  of	 the
goods,	may  form  part	 but  anything	supplied  separately
pursuant  to a separate order, directions or  specifications
to  the purchaser could not form part of the sale  price  of
the  gunny bags. This was done in order to putting  them  in
deliverable state and incidental to the same.
    In	a  slightly different state of facts  this  question
came  before this Court in Commissioner of Taxes,  Assam  v.
Prabhat Marketing Co. Ltd., 19 STC 84. There, the respondent
sold hydrogenated oil which was exempt from sales tax  under
the Assam Sales Tax Act, 1947. The question was whether	 the
value  of the containers in which hydrogenated oil was	sold
could be assessed to sales tax under the Act. The High Court
held that the value of the containers was not assessable  to
sales  tax  unless separate price had been charged  for	 the
containers.  On an appeal this Court held that the value  of
the  containers was assessable to sales tax under  the	said
Act  if	 there was an express or implied agreement  for	 the
sale of such containers and the mere fact that the price  of
the containers was not separately fixed, made no  difference
to the assessment of sales tax. This Court, however, came to
the  conclusion	 that where there was an agreement  to	sell
packing	 material is a pure question of fact depending	upon
the circumstances of each case.
    In	this  case this Court asked the	 question  that	 the
sales tax authorities had to address themselves the question
whether	 the parties having regard to the  circumstances  of
the  case,  intended  to sell or buy  packing  material	 and
						  PG NO 689
whether the subject-matter in the context of sale, was	only
an exempted article or packing material did not form part of
the bargain at all.
    In	that  being  the principle and the  fact  that	here
packing in the gunny bags was done by the dealer in  respect
of  the goods at the time of or before the delivery, in	 our
opinion,  the High Court was in error in the view  it  took.
This  Court had to consider again this aspect of the  matter
in  Jamana Flour & Oil Mills (P) Ltd. v. State of Bihar,  65
STC  462.  There this Court held that whether there  was  an
implied	 agreement to sell packing material along  with	 the
products contained therein, is a question of fact.
    In	view  of  the principles  enunciated  in  these	 two
decisions, though the facts were different, and on the basis
of  the	 conclusive findings recorded by the  Tribunal	that
there  was a contract for packing the silica in sound  gunny
bags,  the cost of packing materials had been  realised,  we
are clearly of the opinion that the High Court was in error.
    In the aforesaid facts and circumstances of the case the
judgment  and order of the High Court are set aside and	 the
order  of the Tribunal is restored. There will, however,  be
no order as to costs.
P.S.S.					   Appeal allowed.




