

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Collector Of Central Excise, ... vs Doaba Co-Operative Sugar Mills ... on 16 August, 1988Equivalent citations: 1988 AIR 2052, 1988 SCR  Supl. (2) 458
Author: S Mukharji
Bench: Mukharji, Sabyasachi (J)
           PETITIONER:
COLLECTOR OF CENTRAL EXCISE, CHANDIGARH

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
DOABA CO-OPERATIVE SUGAR MILLS LTD.,JALANDHAR

DATE OF JUDGMENT16/08/1988

BENCH:
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)
BENCH:
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)
RANGNATHAN, S.

CITATION:
 1988 AIR 2052		  1988 SCR  Supl. (2) 458
 1988 SCC  Supl.  683	  JT 1988 (4)	 28
 1988 SCALE  (2)477


ACT:
    Central  Excises and Salt Act, 1944: Sections IIA,	IIB,
35A(2)	and  35L(b)- Excess production	rebate-	 Erroneously
granted-  Show	cause notice issued  for  recovery-  Whether
valid  and  permissible- Refund of  duty  recovered  without
authority  of  law- General law	 applicable-  Refund  claims
before	departmental authorities- Limitation provided  under
Customs/Central Excise Act and Rules thereunder applicable.
%
    Limitation	Act, 1963: Limitation- Corporation of-	Duty
levied	without	 authority of law- General  law	 applicable-
Starting point- When mistake or error comes to light.



HEADNOTE:
    The Superintendent of Central Excise issued a show cause
notice	on November 15, 1981 to the respondent for  recovery
of  `excess  production' rebate	 erroneously  granted  under
Notification  No. 108/78. The Assistant Collector,  however,
on  July 31, 1982 held that there was no  excess  Production
because	 of  wilful incorrect statement	 or  suppression  of
facts  and  so held that the notice was barred by  lapse  of
time and dropped the demand.
    The Collector of Central Excise exercising powers  under
Section	 35A(2)	 of the Central Excises and Salt  Act,	1944
issued	a  review show cause notice on October 6,  1982	 and
adjudicated the case thereafter.
    The Central Excise and Gold (Control) Appellate Tribunal
having	allowed	 the appeal of the respondent,	the  Revenue
challenged the said order in this Court.
    Dismissing the Appeal,
    HELD:  1.  Section	IIA  of	 the  Act  would  come	into
operation  only	 when the demand is on	account	 of  Central
Excise	 duty  short  levied  or  not  levied  or   refunded
erroneously.  The issue in the instant case, was not any  of
the said reasons. [460E]
						  PG NO 458
						 PG NO 459
    2.	Where the duty has been levied without the authority
of  Law or without reference to any statutory  authority  or
the  specific  provisions of the Act and  the  Rules  framed
thereunder have no application, the decision will be  guided
by  the general Law and the date of Limitation would be	 the
starting  point	 when the mistake or the error	would	come
into light. [460F]
    3.	In making claims for refund before the	departmental
authority  as assessee is bound within the four	 corners  of
the  Statute and the period of limitation prescribed in	 the
Central	 Excise Act and the Rules framed thereunder must  be
adhered	 to.  The authority functioning under  the  Act	 are
bound  by the provisions of the Act. If the proceedings	 are
taken  under  the Act by the department	 the  provisions  of
limitation  prescribed in the Act will prevail. [460G1
    4.	It  may,  however,  be open  to	 the  department  to
initiate proceedings in the Civil Court for recovery of	 the
amount	due to the department in case such a remedy is	open
on  the ground that the money received by the  assessee	 was
2not in the nature of refund. L460H]
    Miles  lndia  Ltd. v. Assistant  Collector	of  Customs,
[l985] ECR  289 referred to.



JUDGMENT:
    CIVlL  APPELLATE JURISDlUTION: Civil Appeal No. 283	 of
1988.
    From  the Order dated 9. 10. 1987 of the Customs  Excise
and Gold Control Appellate Tribunal, New Delhi in Appeal No.
F-l744/83-D [Order No. 808/87-D ).
    M.K.  Banerjee, Solicitor General? R.P.  Srivastava	 and
Mrs. Sushma Suri for the Appellant.
    M.G. Ramachandran for the Respondent.
    The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
    SABYASACHI	 MUKHARJI,  J. This is	a statutory   appeal
against	 the  decision	of  the	 Customs,  Excise  and	Gold
(Control)  Appel-late Tribunal, under Section 35L(b) of	 the
Central	 Excises & Salt Act, 1944 [hereinafter	called	'the
Act').
    A sum of Rs.5,60,679.40 was sanctioned to the respondent
on the basis of Notification No. 108/78 as an incentive	 for
excess	production. On 18.5.1979, the said sum was  credited
to  the	 Personal  Ledger  Account of  the  dealer.  On	 5th
November, 1981, the Superintendent of Central Excise  issued
a  show cause notice asking the respondent to show-cause  as
to why the sum of Rs.66,306.62, granted in excess under	 the
aforesaid notification, be not recovered from it.
    On	31.7.1982, the Asstt. Collector, however, held	that
there  was no excess production because of wilful  incorrect
statement or suppression of facts by the respondent. In	 the
premises,  he  held that the notice was barred by  lapse  of
time according to the statute and, accordingly, dropped	 the
demand.
    On	 6th  October,	1982,  the  Collector	of   Central
Excise, Chandigarh, while exercising his power under Section
25A(2) of the Act as it stood at the material time, issued a
review	show-cause  notice against the order of	 the  Asstt.
Collector.  The	 case  was  adjudicated	 thereafter  by	 the
Collector  who	found that the statutory  time	limit  under
Section	 111 of the Act would come into play only where	 the
demand is on account of the central excise duty short levied
or not levied or refunded erroneously .
    Aggrieved  thereby, on or about 9th October,  1987,	 the
respondent  preferred  an appeal before	 the  Tribunal.	 The
Tribunal  allowed  the appeal. The propriety  of.  the	said
decision is being sought to be challenged in this appeal. It
appears that Section 11 of the Act would come into operation
only  when the demand is on account of central	excise	duty
short  levied or not levied or refunded erroneously. In	 the
instant case the issue was not for any of the said reasons.
    It	appears that where the duty has been levied  without
the  authority of law or without reference to any  statutory
authority  or  the specific provisions of the  Act  and	 the
Rules  framed thereunder have no application,  the  decision
will be guided by the general law and the date of limitation
would  be the starting point when the mistake or  the  error
comes  to light. But in making claims for refund before	 the
departmental  authority,  an assessee is bound	within	four
corners	 of  the  Statute  and	the  period  of	  limitation
prescribed  in the Central Excise Act and the  Rules  framed
thereunder must be adhered to . The authorities	 functioning
under the Act are bound by the provisions of the Act. If the
proceedings  are taken under the Act by the department,	 the
provisions of limitation prescribed in the act will prevail.
It  may,  however;  be open to the  department	to  initiate
proceedings  in the Civil Court for recovery of	 the  amount
						  PG NO 461
due to the department in case when  such a remedy is open on
the  ground that the money received by the assessee was	 not
in  the	 nature of refund. -This was the view taken  by	 the
Tribunal in a previous decision .in the case of Miles  India
Ltd. v. The Asstt. Collector of Customs, but it was assailed
before	this  Court. The appeal was  withdrawn.	 This  Court
observed that the Customs Authorities, acting under the Act,
were  justified in disallowing the claim for refund as	they
were bound by the period of limitation provided therefor  in
the relevant provisions of the Customs Act., 1962. If really
the  payment  of the duty was under a mistake  of  law,	 the
party  might seek recourse to such alternative remedy as  it
might  be  advised. See the observations of  this  Court  in
Miles  India  Ltd. v. The Assistant  Collector	of  Customs,
[1985] E.C.R. 289.
    In	the  aforesaid view of the matter the  Tribunal	 was
right.	The  appeal,  therefore, has no	 merits	 and  it  is
accordingly not entertained and dismissed. There is no order
as to costs.
N.V.K.					Appeal dismissed.




