

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Union Of India Etc vs G.N. Tiwari, K.L. Jain & Ors on 19 November, 1985Equivalent citations: 1986 AIR  348, 1985 SCR  Supl. (3) 744
Author: A Sen
Bench: Sen, A.P. (J)
           PETITIONER:
UNION OF INDIA ETC.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
G.N. TIWARI, K.L. JAIN & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT19/11/1985

BENCH:
SEN, A.P. (J)
BENCH:
SEN, A.P. (J)
MADON, D.P.

CITATION:
 1986 AIR  348		  1985 SCR  Supl. (3) 744
 1986 SCC  (1)	89	  1985 SCALE  (2)1081


ACT:
     Indian Administrative Service (Regulation of Seniority)
Rules, 1954, Rule 3(3) (b) - Year of allotment, reckoning of
- Whether  a member of the State Civil Service(Executive) on
his temporary appointment by the State Government under rule
9 of  the Indian Administrative Service (Cadre) Rules, 1954,
for a  period exceeding	 six months, is entitled to have his
continuous period  of officiation  in a	 senior post for the
purposes of  computation of  the  "year	 of  allotment"	 and
fixation  of   seniority  -  Indian  Administrative  Service
(Cadre) Rules,	1954, Rule  9, scope  of  -  Clause  (1)  of
Section III  of Schedule  II of	 the  Indian  Administrative
Service (Pay) Rules, 1954.



HEADNOTE:
     The respondent,  in CA  5045 of  1985 was a substantive
member of  the State  Civil Service (Executive) in the State
of Madhya  Pradesh. He was, on November 7, 1975, temporarily
appointed by the State Government to the post of a collector
which is  a senior  post on  the cadre	under rule  9 of the
Indian Administrative  Service (Cadre)	Rule, 1954  and	 had
been continuously  officiating on such post with effect from
November 10,  1975 till	 the Central Government accorded its
approval on  October 1,	 1976 for  his	appointment  in	 the
Indian Administrative  Service. The  promotion quota of non-
cadre officers	to cadre posts which was 50 prior to October
1, 1976 was on that date increased to 56. The respondent was
formally appointed  to the  Indian Administrative Service by
the Central  Government	 on  December  7,  1976.  The  State
Government of Madhya Pradesh by its letter dated February 3,
1979 informed  him that	 he was assigned 1972 as the year of
allotment  by	the  Central   Government.  The	 respondent,
therefore,  filed  a  petition	under  Article	226  of	 the
Constitution for  an appropriate writ or direction directing
the appellants to assign him, 1971 as the year of allotment,
fix his	 seniority accordingly	and allow  all consequential
reliefs.
     The High  Court, held:  (a) that  though there  was  no
specific  approval   of	 the   Central	Government   to	 the
appointment of the respondent, such prior approval was not a
condition precedent
745
for valid  appointment to  a cadre under rule 9 of the Cadre
Rules and,  therefore, the  continuous	officiation  by	 the
respondent as the Collector for the period from November 10,
1975 to	 September 30,	1976 could  not be  ignored  on	 the
ground that the appointment was not specifically approved by
the Central  Government: (b)  the existence  of a vacancy in
the promotion  quota of	 cadre officers	 was not a condition
pre-requisite for  making  an  appointment  of	a  non-cadre
officer to  a cadre post under rule 9 of the Cadre Rules and
therefore, the	fact that  there was over utilization of the
State  Deputation  Reserve  Quota  had	no  bearing  on	 the
question  of   the  validity   of  the	appointment  of	 the
respondent on  a cadre	post;  (c)  that  the  condition  of
approval by  the Central  Government required by the proviso
to clause  (I) of  Section III	of Schedule II of the Indian
Administrative Service	(Pay) Rules,  1954 was	only for pay
fixation and  it had  nothing to do with the validity of the
officiation of	a non-cadre  officer in	 a cadre  post under
Rule 9	of the	Cadre Rules;  and (d)  that  his  continuous
officiation in	a senior post of Collector from November 10,
1975 was  in accordance	 with Rule  9 of the Cadre Rules and
the same  must enure  for his  benefit to give him seniority
under Rule  3(3) (b)  of the Seniority Rules. The High Court
thus allowed the petition.
     Following the said case reported as K.L. Jain  v. Union
of India,  (1984) MPLJ 284, the High Court of Madhya Pradesh
in the	connected cases	 out  of  which	 the  present  Civil
Appeals	 Nos.	5040-5044  of	1985  arise  held  that	 the
respondents therein  also be  assigned years  1966, 1967 and
1971 as	 their "years  of allotment" respectively under rule
3(3) (b)  of the  Seniority Rules and their placement in the
seniority list be accordingly revised.
     Allowing the appeals, the Court
^
     HELD :  1.1 For  the purposes  of appointment of a non-
cadre officer  to a  cadre post	 under Rule  9 of the Indian
Administrative Service	(Cadre)	 Rules,	 1954,	neither	 the
prior approval of the Central Government to such appointment
nor the	 existence of  a vacancy in the promotion quota is a
condition precedent. [754 G]
     1.2 It  is plain  upon a  construction of Rule 9 of the
Indian Administrative  Service	(Cadre)	 Rules,	 1954,	that
under sub-rule	(1) the	 State Government  can direct that a
cadre post  may be  filled by  a person	 who is	 not a cadre
officer. If  it is  satisfied that the vacancy is not likely
to last	 for more  than three  months or  that there  is  no
suitable cadre officer available for filling
746
the vacancy. Under sub-rule (2), where in any State a person
than a	cadre officer  is appointed  to a  cadre post  for a
period exceeding  three	 months,  the  State  Government  is
required  to  forthwith	 report	 the  fact  to	the  Central
Government  together   with  the   reasons  for	 making	 the
appointment. Under rule 3, on receipt of a report under sub-
rule (2)  or otherwise,	 the Central  Government may  direct
that the State Government shall terminate the appointment of
such person  and appoint  thereto a cadre officer, and where
any direction  is so  issued,  the  State  Government  shall
accordingly give effect thereto. Under sub-rule (4), where a
cadre post  is likely  to be filled by a person who is not a
cadre officer for a period exceeding six months, the Central
Government is required to report the full facts to the Union
Public Service	Commission with the reasons for holding that
no suitable  officer is	 available for	filling the post and
may, in	 the light  of the  advice given by the Union Public
Service Commission,  give suitable  direction to  the  State
Government concerned in that behalf. [753 E-H; 754 A-D]
     1.3 The  power of the Central Government under sub-rule
(3) to	direct termination  of appointment of a person other
than a	cadre officer to a cadre post for a period exceeding
three months or more cannot be said to be a larger power and
carried with  it the  power to	direct	curtailment  of	 the
period of  officiation of  such person.	 The power to direct
termination of	the appointment	 of a non-cadre officer in a
senior post is distinct from the power to direct curtailment
of his	period of officiation. In the absence of a provision
made in the Cadre Rules empowering the Central Government to
direct the  curtailment of  the period	of officiation	of a
non-cadre officer  on a cadre post for purposes of reckoning
his year  of allotment	under rule  3(3)(b) of the Seniority
Rules and since such a power cannot be spelled out from sub-
rule (3) of rule 9 of the Cadre Rules which confers power on
the Central  Government to direct termination of appointment
of a non-cadre officer to a cadre post, the orders passed by
the Central  Government fixing	different dates	 as the date
from  which  the  period  of  officiation  of  each  of	 the
respondents is	to be  reckoned for  determining the year of
allotment under	 rule 3(3)(b)  of the  Seniority  Rules	 are
wholly arbitrary  and capricious. Further the failure of the
Central Government to give a direction under sub-rule (3) of
rule 9	to terminate  the  appointment	of  the	 respondents
implies that  their continuous	officiation on	a cadre post
had the	 tacit approval of the Central Government. [756 G-H;
757 A-D]
     2.	 In   these  cases,  the  respondents  as  non-cadre
officers could	not be	denied	the  benefit  of  continuous
officiations in	 a senior  post	 merely	 because  the  State
Deputation Reserve Quota was over utilised. [757 D-E]
747
     Barjeet Singh v. Union of India & Ors., [1980] 3 S.C.R.
459; and  Amrik Singh  & Ors.  V. Union of India & Ors......
[1980] 3 S.C.R. 485 followed.
     2.2 The  respondents who  were appointed to the Service
by promotion  in accordance  with sub-rule  1 of  Rule 8 the
Recruitment Rules  are entitled	 under Explanation 1 to Rule
3(3)(b) of  the Indian Administrative Service (Regulation of
Seniority) Rules,  1954 to  have the  entire period of their
continuous officiation	in a senior post, for the purpose of
determination of  their seniority,  counted from the date of
their officiating  appointment to such senior post whichever
was later.  They are  also entitled  by reason	of the legal
fiction contained in Explanation 2 to have the entire period
of their  continuous officiation without a break in a senior
post from  the date of their officiating appointment to such
senior post  till the  date of	their appointment  into	 the
service, counted  for purposes	of determining their year of
allotment under	 rule 3(3)(b)  of the  Indian Administrative
Services (Regulation  of Seniority) Rules 1954. It cannot be
said that  their officiation  in a  senior post on the cadre
for the	 periods in  question was merely fortuitous or stop-
gap. [756 C-F]
     2.3 Where	a person  other	 than  a  cadre	 officer  is
appointed to  the service  by promotion	 in accordance	with
sub-rule (1) of Rule 8 of the Recruitment Rules, the year of
allotment of  the junior most amongst the officers recruited
to the	service in  accordance with  rule 7 of the Rules who
officiated continuously in a senior post from a date earlier
than the  commencement of such officiation by the former, is
the determinative  factor in  allocation  of  the  "year  of
allotment" under  rule 3(3)(b)	of the Seniority Rules. [755
G-H; 756 A]
     K.L. Jain	v.  Union  of  India,  [1984]  M.P.L.J.	 284
affirmed and approved.



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION : Civil Appeals Nos. 5040-
5044 of 1985.
     From the  Judgment and  Order dated  16.12.1983 of	 the
Madhya Pradesh	High Court  in Misc. Petition Nos. 297, 142,
830, 891 and 1520 of 1982.
			    AND
	       Civil Appeal No. 5045 of 1985.
748
     From the  Judgment and  Order  dated  9.9.1983  of	 the
Madhya Pradesh	High Court  in Misc.  Petition No.  1186  of
1981.
     V. C. Mahajan, R.N. Poddar and Mrs. K. Kumarmanglam for
the Appellants.
     V. Bobde,	C.L.  Sahu  and	 Miss  Bina  Gupta  for	 the
Respondents in C.A. Nos. 5040-5044 of 1985.
     K.K. Venugopal,  C.L. Sahu	 for the  Respondent in C.A.
No. 5045 of 1985.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     SEN, J.  After hearing  learned counsel for the parties
we had	by our	order dated October 11, 1985 dismissed these
appeals. We now proceed to give the reasons therefor.
     These appeals  by special	leave directed	against	 the
judgments and  orders of the Madhya Pradesh High Court dated
September 9,  1983 and December 16, 1983 raise a question as
to whether  a member  of the State Civil Service (Executive)
on his	temporary appointment  by the State Government under
r. 9  of the  Indian Administrative  Service. (Cadre) Rules,
1954 for  a period exceeding six months, is entitled to have
his continuous period of officiation in a senior post, to be
taken into  account in	reckoning the  'year  of  allotment'
under  r.3  (3)(b)  of	the  Indian  Administrative  Service
(Regulation of	Seniority)  Rules,  1954.  That	 depends  on
whether prior  approval of  the Central	 Government  or	 the
Union Public  Service Commission  to such  appointment under
sub-r.(2) of r.9 of the Cadre Rules for the appointment of a
non-cadre officer to a cadre post by the State Government is
a condition  precedent for  a valid appointment under r.9 of
the Cadre  Rules.  Further,  the  question  is	whether	 the
existence of  a vacancy	 in the cadre strength of promotees,
i.e. over-utilization  of the State Deputation Reserve Quota
is a  relevant factor  to be  taken  into  consideration  in
determining the period of continuous officiation in a senior
post on	 the cadre  till the  Central Government accords its
approval to such appointment under r.9 of the Cadre Rules in
assigning the  year of	allotment under	 r. 3(3)(b)  of	 the
Seniority Rules.
     Facts in  these cases are more or less similar. It will
suffice for  our purposes  first to  state the facts in K.L.
Jain's case.  The respondent was a substantive member of the
State Civil
749
Service (Executive)  in the  State of Madhya Pradesh. He was
on November  7, 1975  temporarily  appointed  by  the  State
Government to the post of a collector which is a senior post
on the Cadre under r. 9 of the Indian Administrative Service
(Cadre) Rules, 1954 and had been continuously officiating on
such  post   w.e.f.  November  10,  1975  till	the  Central
Government accorded its approval on October 1, 1976, for his
appointment  in	  the  Indian  Administrative  Service.	 The
promotion quota	 of non-cadre officers to cadre posts was 50
prior to  October 1,  1976 but was on that date increased to
56. The	 respondent was	 formally appointed  to	 the  Indian
Administrative Service by the Central Government on December
7, 1976.  The State  Government of  Madhya Pradesh by letter
dated February	3, 1979	 informed the respondent that he was
assigned 1972  as the  year  of	 allotment  by	the  Central
Government.  Feeling   aggrieved,  the	respondent  filed  a
petition before	 the  High  Court  under  Art.	226  of	 the
Constitution for  an appropriate  writ, direction  or order,
directing that	he should  instead be  assigned 1971  as his
year of	 allotment under  r. 3(3)(b)  of the Seniority Rules
and his seniority should be fixed on that basis, and that on
refixation of his seniority, he be allowed the consequential
reliefs to which he may be entitled.
     The appellant contested the respondent's claim on three
grounds, namely	 : (i)	he was	not entitled  to  count	 his
continuous officiation	in the senior post of Collector from
November 10,  1975 as  his appointment	to such	 post in the
cadre was  not	approved  by  the  Central  Government	till
October 1,  1976 i.e.,	for any	 period prior  to October 1,
1976; (ii)  there was  no vacancy  in the  cadre strength of
promotees for  any period  prior  to  October  1,  1976	 and
therefore the  appointment of  the respondent to the post of
Collector for the period from November 10, 1975 to September
30, 1976  had to  be ignored;  and  (iii)  there  was  over-
utilization of	the State  Deputation Reserve  Quota and for
this reason  also his  continuous officiation  on the senior
post of a Collector could not be taken into account.
     G.P. Singh,  CJ speaking for himself and Faizanuddin, J
in K.L.	 Jain v.  Union of  India, (1984) MPLJ 284 held that
though	there  was  no	specific  approval  of	the  Central
Government to  the appointment of the respondent, such prior
approval  was	not  a	 condition  precedent  for  a  valid
appointment to	a cadre	 under r.9  of the  Cadre Rules	 and
therefore the  continuous officiation  by the  respondent as
the Collector for period from November 10, 1975 to September
30, 1976  could not  be	 ignored  on  the  ground  that	 the
appointment was	 not specifically  approved by	the  Central
Government. Further,  it was  held that	 the existence	of a
vacancy
750
in the promotion quota of cadre officers was not a condition
pre-requisite for  making  an  appointment  of	a  non-cadre
officer to  a cadre  post under	 r.9 of	 the Cadre Rules and
therefore, merely  because there was over-utilization of the
State  Deputation  Reserve  Quota  had	no  bearing  on	 the
question  of   the  validity   of  the	appointment  of	 the
respondent on  a cadre post. It also held that the condition
of approval  by	 the  Central  Government  required  by	 the
proviso to  cl.(1) of  s.III of	 Schedule II  of the  Indian
Administrative Service	(Pay) Rules,  1954 was	only for any
fixation and  it had  nothing to do with the validity of the
officiation of	a non-cadre  cadre officer  in a  cadre post
under r.9  of the  Cadre Rules. It, accordingly, allowed the
writ petition  filed by	 the respondent	 and held  that	 his
continuous officiation	in a  senior post  of Collector from
November 10,  1975 was	in accordance  with r.9 of the Cadre
Rules and  the same  must enure	 for his benefit to give him
seniority under r.3 (3)(b) of the Seniority Rules.
     In the connected case, G.N. Tiwari and 19 other members
of the	Madhya Pradesh	cadre of  the Indian  Administrative
Service who  had similarly  been deprived  of the benefit of
their continuous  officiation on their temporary appointment
to the	cadre post  of a  Collector by	the State Government
under r.9  of the Cadre Rules and had been assigned the year
1967 instead  of 1966, the year 1968 instead of 1967, or the
year 1972  instead of 1971 as the year of allotment under r.
3(3)(b) of  the Seniority Rules also moved the High Court by
a petition  under Art.	226 of the Constitution based on the
same grounds,  and prayed for the grant of similar relief. A
Division Bench	consisting of  J.S. Verma  and C.P.  Sen, JJ
following the  decision in  K.L.Jain's case allowed the writ
petition filed	by the	aforesaid respondents  and  directed
that they be assigned the years 1966, 1967 and 1971 as their
years of  allotment respectively  under r.  3(3)(b)  of	 the
Seniority Rules,  as claimed by them, and their placement in
the seniority  list be accordingly revised. It expressed the
hope that  the State  Government and  the Central Government
would give  them all the consequential reliefs to which they
may be	entitled on  re-fixation of their seniority. Against
the two	 judgments, the	 Union of  India has preferred these
appeals by special leave.
     In support	 of the	 appeal,  learned  counsel  for	 the
appellant  advanced   two  contentions,	 namely	 :  (1)	 The
respondents were not entitled to have their entire period of
continuous officiation	in a  senior post  under r.9  of the
Cadre Rules  taken into	 account in  assigning the  years of
allotment under	 r. 3(3)(b)  of the Seniority Rules as their
temporary appointment to such senior
751
post in	 the cadre  was subject to the prior approval of the
Central Government  under sub-r.(2)  of	 r.9  of  the  Cadre
Rules, and  (2) They as non-cadre officers were not entitled
to appointment	to the	cadre post  of a  Collector  because
there was  no  actual  vacancy	in  the	 cadre	strength  of
promotees. It  is  urged  that	the  power  of	the  Central
Government under  sub-r.(3) of	r.9 of	the Cadre  Rules  to
direct termination  of appointment  of a person other than a
cadre officer  appointed for a period exceeding three months
is a  larger power and necessarily carries within its ambit,
the lessor  power to  direct curtailment  of the  period  of
officiation. It	 is further  urged that the respondents were
not entitled  to the  benefit of continuous officiation in a
senior post to be taken into account in reckoning their year
of allotment  because there  was no  vacancy  in  the  cadre
strength of  promotees. In  fact, there was over-utilization
of State  Deputation Reserve Quota. We are afraid, we cannot
accept this line of reasoning.
     The assignment  of the year of allotment is governed by
r.3 of	the Indian  Administrative  Service  (Regulation  of
Seniority) Rules,  1954. The  relevant clause  applicable to
the respondents	 is that contained in r. 3(3)(b) which reads
as follows:
	  "3(3).  The	year  of  allotment  of	 an  officer
	  appointed to the Service after the commencement of
	  these rules shall be -
	  (a)	       x	   x	       x	   x
	  (b) Where  the officer is appointed to the Service
	  by promotion	in accordance  with sub-rule  (1) of
	  rule 8  of the  Recruitment  Rules,  the  year  of
	  allotment of	the junior-most	 among the  officers
	  recruited to the Service in accordance with rule 7
	  of these  rules who  officiated continuously	in a
	  senior post  from a  date earlier than the date of
	  commencement of such officiation by the former :
	  Provided that	 the year of allotment of an officer
	  appointed to	the Service  in accordance with sub-
	  rule (1)  of rule  8 of  the Recruitment Rules who
	  started officiating  continuously in a senior post
	  from a  date earlier than the date of which any of
	  the officer recruited to the Service in accordance
	  with rule 7 of these Rules so started officiating,
	  shall	 be   determined  ad   hoc  by	the  Central
	  Government  in   consultation	  with	 the   State
	  Government concerned :
752
	  Explanation 1 - In respect of an officer appointed
	  to the  Service by  promotion in  accordance	with
	  sub-rule (1)	of rule	 8 of the Recruitment Rules,
	  the period  of his  continuous  officiation  in  a
	  senior   post	  shall,   for	 the   purposes	  of
	  determination of  his seniority,  count only	from
	  the date  of the  inclusion of  his  name  in	 the
	  Select List,	or from	 the date of his officiating
	  appointment to  such	senior	post,  whichever  is
	  latter :
	  Explanation 2 - An officer shall be deemed to have
	  officiated continuously  in a	 senior post  from a
	  certain date	if during  the period from that date
	  to the  date of  his confirmation  in	 the  senior
	  grade he  continues to  hold without	any break or
	  reversion a senior post otherwise than as a purely
	  temporary or local arrangement."
     It is  common ground  that the  post of  Collector is a
senior post.  It is  not disputed  that the respondents were
continuously officiating  in a	senior post for long periods
prior to  the  date  of	 their	appointment  to	 the  Indian
Administrative Service.	 It is	also not  in dispute that if
the  entire   period  of   continuous  officiation   by	 the
respondents in	the senior  posts of  Collectors were  taken
into account,  they would  be  entitled	 to  the  year	1966
instead of  1967, the year 1967 instead of 1968 and the year
1971 instead  of 1972  as the 'year of allotment' to them in
accordance with r. 3(3)(b) of the Seniority Rules.
     The appointment  of the  respondents to the senior post
of Collector  was made	in accordance with r.9 of the Indian
Administrative Service	(Cadre) Rules,	1954. It is in these
terms:
	  "9. Temporary appointment of non-cadre officers to
	  cadre posts -
	  (1) A	 cadre post  in a  State may  be filled by a
	  person who  is not  a cadre  officer if  the State
	  Government is satisfied -
	  (a) that  the vacancy	 is not	 likely to  last for
	  more than three months, or
	  (b)  that  there  is	no  suitable  cadre  officer
	  available for filling the vacancy.
753
	  (2) Where in any State a person other than a cadre
	  officer is  appointed to a cadre post for a period
	  exceeding three months, the State Government shall
	  forthwith  report   the  fact	  to   the   Central
	  Government together  with the	 reasons for  making
	  the appointment.
	  (3) On  receipt of  a report under sub-rule (2) or
	  otherwise, the  Central Government may direct that
	  the	State	Government   shall   terminate	 the
	  appointment of  such person  and appoint thereto a
	  cadre officer,  and  where  any  direction  is  so
	  issued, the  State  Government  shall	 accordingly
	  give effect thereto.
	  (4) Where a cadre post is likely to be filled by a
	  person who  is not  a cadre  officer for  a period
	  exceeding six months, the Central Government shall
	  report the  full facts to the Union Public Service
	  Commission with  the reasons	for holding  that no
	  suitable officer is available for filling the post
	  and may  in the  light of  the advice given by the
	  Union	 Public	 Service  Commission  give  suitable
	  direction to the State Government concerned."
     It is  plain upon a construction of r.9 that under sub-
r. (1) the State Government can direct that a cadre post may
be filled  by a	 person who  is not a cadre officer if it is
satisfied that	the vacancy  is not  likely to last for more
than three months or that there is no suitable cadre officer
available  for	 filling  the	vacancy.  In   these  cases,
admittedly, the	 appointments of each of the respondents who
was a  person other  than a cadre officer to the senior post
of Collector  in the  cadre lasted for nearly a year or more
and  therefore	 exceeded  the	 period	 of   three   months
contemplated by sub-r.(1). Such an appointment could be made
by the State Government on being satisfied that there was no
suitable officer  for filling the vacancy. It is not averred
in the	returns filed by the State Government or the Central
Government in  the High	 Court that  this condition  was not
satisfied when the respondents were so appointed. Under sub-
r.(2), where  in any  State a  person  other  than  a  cadre
officer is  appointed to a cadre post for a period exceeding
three months,  the State Government is required to forthwith
report the  fact to the Central Government together with the
reasons for making the appointment. From the documents filed
by the	State Government  in the High Court, it appears that
such a	report was  made by  the  State	 Government  to	 the
Central Government  on June 26, 1976. The Central Government
by letter dated February 19, 1977 asked for a consolidated
754
proposal for  approval of  officiation of non-cadre officers
on cadre  posts for the half year ending September 30, 1976.
In compliance  therewith,  the	State  Government  sent	 the
required proposal  on March  29, 1977.	Under sub-r. (3), on
receipt of  a  report  under  sub-r.(2)	 or  otherwise,	 the
Central Government  may direct	that  the  State  Government
shall terminate	 the appointment  of such person and appoint
thereto a  cadre officer,  and where  any  direction  is  so
issued, the  State Government  shall accordingly give effect
thereto. Under sub-r.(4), where a cadre post is likely to be
filled by  a person  who is not a cadre officer for a period
exceeding six  months, the Central Government is required to
report the full facts to the Union Public Service Commission
with the  reasons for  holding that  no suitable  officer is
available for  filling the post and may, in the light of the
advice given  by the  Union Public  Service Commission, give
suitable direction to the State Government concerned in that
behalf.
     Interpreting the  provisions of  sub-rules (2),(3)	 and
(4), the High Court in K.L. Jain's case, rightly observed :
	  "In the instant case, the Central Government never
	  directed the	State Government  to  terminate	 the
	  petitioner's appointment.  It is also not the case
	  that the  U.P.S.C.  tendered	any  advice  to	 the
	  Central  Government	that  the   appointment	  be
	  terminated. It  is true  that there  is a specific
	  approval  of	 the  Central	Government  to	 the
	  appointment of  the petitioner  but that  is not a
	  condition precedent  for a valid appointment under
	  Rule 9  and  the  petitioner's  officiation  in  a
	  senior cadre	post from 10th November 1975 to 30th
	  September 1976  cannot be  ignored on	 the  ground
	  that the appointment was not specifically approved
	  by the  Central Government.  The petitioner's said
	  officiation cannot  also be  ignored on the ground
	  that there  was no  vacancy during  this period in
	  the promotion quota of the cadre officers."
The High  Court held  that prior  approval  of	the  Central
Government was	not a condition precedent to the appointment
of a  non-cadre officer	 to a  cadre post  under r.9  of the
Cadre Rules. It further held that the existence of a vacancy
in the	promotion quota	 was not  a pre-requisite for making
such an	 appointment. The appointment of the respondent K.L.
Jain to	 the  Indian  Administrative  Service  made  by	 the
Central Government  on December	 7, 1976  was on a post when
there was admittedly a vacancy in the promotion quota
755
of non-cadre  officers, but his temporary appointment by the
State Government  to the post of Collector which is a senior
post in	 the cadre  under r.9  on November  7, 1975 was at a
time when  there was no such vacancy in the promotion quota.
It appears that the promotion quota of non-cadre officers to
cadre posts  was 50 prior to October 1, 1976 and was on that
date increased	to 56.	Since the existence of a vacancy was
not a condition precedent for making an appointment under r.
9 of  a non-cadre  officer to  a cadre	post, the High Court
held that  the respondent's  officiation from  November	 10,
1975 to	 September 30, 1976, could not be held to be invalid
or ignored.  On the  same reasoning,  it held  that the fact
that the  State Government  had over-utilized the Deputation
Reserve Quota  during the  aforesaid period,  could have  no
bearing on  the question  of validity  of his appointment on
the cadre post. It then added :
	  "It may  be that if the Central Government thought
	  that the State Deputation Reserve Quota which gave
	  rise to  a vacancy  of a cadre post, it could have
	  directed the	State Government  to  terminate	 the
	  petitioner's appointment  but such  a	 course	 was
	  never adopted.  As the  Central Government did not
	  issue any  direction to  the State  Government  to
	  terminate  the   petitioner's	  appointment,	 the
	  appointment has  to be  held to be valid and given
	  effect to."
     In that view, the High Court held that the respondent's
continuous officiation	in a  senior post  from November 10,
1975 was  in accordance	 with r.9 of the Cadre Rules and the
same must  enure for his benefit for reckoning his seniority
under r.3(3)(b)	 of the	 Seniority Rules.  Further, it	held
that the  requirement of  approval of the Central Government
as contained  in the  proviso to cl. I of s. III of Schedule
II of  the Indian  Administrative Service  (Pay) Rules, 1954
cannot be  imported into r.9 of the Cadre Rules or r.3(3)(b)
of the Seniority Rules. The view expressed by the High Court
in K.L.	 Jain's case was followed with approval in the later
case of G.N. Tiwari & Ors. v. Union of India.
     Where a  person other than a cadre officer is appointed
to the	Service by promotion in accordance with sub-r.(1) of
r.8 of	the Recruitment	 Rules, the year of allotment of the
junior-most amongst the officers recruited to the Service in
accordance with r.7 of the Rules who officiated continuously
in a  senior post  from a date earlier than the commencement
of such	 officiation by	 the former,  is  the  determinative
factor in  allocation of  the 'year  of allotment'  under r.
3(3)(b) of the Seniority Rules.
756
Proviso thereto	 enjoins that  the year	 of allotment  of an
officer appointed  to the  Service in  accordance with	sub-
r.(1)  of   r.8	 of   the  Recruitment	 Rules	who  started
officiating continuously  in  a	 senior	 post  from  a	date
earlier than the date on which any of the officers recruited
to  the	  Service  in	accordance  with   r.7	so   started
officiating, shall  be determined  and hoc  by	the  Central
Government  in	 consultation  with   the  State  Government
concerned. Explanation	1 to  r.3(3)(b) interdicts  that  in
respect of  an officer appointed to the Service by promotion
in accordance  with sub-r.(1)  of  r.8	of  the	 Recruitment
Rules, the  period of his continuous officiating in a senior
post shall,  for purposes of determination of his seniority,
count only  from the  date of  inclusion of  his name in the
Select List, or from the date of his officiating appointment
to  such   senior  post,  whichever  is	 later.	 Explanation
provides that  an officer  shall be deemed to have officiate
continuously in	 a senior post from a certain date if during
the period  from the date of the date of his confirmation in
the senior  post he  continued to  hold without any break or
reversion  the	senior	post  otherwise	 than  as  a  purely
temporary  or	local  arrangement.   In  these	 cases,	 the
respondents who	 were appointed	 to the service by promotion
in accordance with sub-r.(1) of r.8 of the Recruitment Rules
were entitled  under Explanation I to have the entire period
of continuous  officiation in a senior post, for the purpose
of determination  of their  seniority, counted from the date
of inclusion  of their	names in the Select List or from the
date of	 his officiating  appointment to  such senior  post,
whichever was  later. They  were also  entitled by reason of
the legal  fiction contained  in Explanation  2 to  have the
entire period  of their	 continuous  officiation  without  a
break in  a senior  post from  the date of their officiating
appointment to	such senior  post till	the  date  of  their
appointment  into  the	Service,  counted  for	purposes  of
determining their  year of allotment under r. 3(3)(b) of the
Seniority Rules. It cannot be said that their officiation in
a senior  post on  the cadre for the periods in question was
merely fortuitous or stop-gap.
     We are not impressed with the submission that the power
of  the	  Central  Government	under  sub-r.(3)  to  direct
termination of	appointment of	a person  other than a cadre
officer to  a cadre post for a period exceeding three months
or more	 was a larger power and carried with it the power to
direct curtailment  of the  period of  officiation  of	such
person. Obviously,  the power  to direct  termination of the
appointment of	a non-cadre  officer in	 a  senior  post  is
distinct from  the power to direct curtailment of his period
of officiation. There is no such provision made in the Cadre
Rules empowering the Central Government to direct the
757
curtailment of	the period  of officiation  of	a  non-cadre
officer on  a cadre  post for purposes of reckoning his year
of allotment  under r.3(3)(b) of the Seniority Rules. Such a
power cannot  be spelled  out from  sub-r.(3) of  r.9 of the
Cadre Rules which confers power on the Central Government to
direct termination  of appointment of a non-cadre officer to
a cadre	 post. In  the absence	of  such  a  provision,	 the
impugned order	passed by  the Central Government appointing
October 1,  1976 as  the  date	from  which  the  period  of
officiation is	to be  reckoned for  determining the year of
allotment under	 r.3(3)(b) of the Seniority Rules was wholly
arbitrary and  capricious and  therefore rightly struck down
by the	High Court. The failure of the Central Government to
give a	direction under	 sub-r.(3) of  r.9 to  terminate the
appointment of the respondents implies that their continuous
officiation on	a cadre	 post had  the tacit approval of the
Central Government,  particularly in  view of  the fact that
the Central  Government by  letter dated  February 19,	1977
required the  State  Government	 to  submit  a	consolidated
proposal for approval of officiation of non-cadre officer on
cadre posts  for the  half year	 ending September  30, 1976.
This was  followed by a report of the State Government dated
March 29,  1977.  The  Central	Government  by	order  dated
October 1,  1976 accorded  its approval to their appointment
in  the	 Indian	 Administrative	 Service.  Furthermore,	 the
respondents as	non-cadre officers  could not  be denied the
benefit of  continuous officiation  in a  senior post merely
because	 the   State  Deputation   Reserve  Quota  was	over
utilised: vide	Harjeet Singh  v. Union	 of  India  &  Ors.,
[1980] 3 S.C.R. 459 and Amrik Singh & Ors. v. Union of India
& Ors., [1980] 3 S.C.R. 485.
     The result	 therefore is that the appeals must fail and
are dismissed. There shall be no order as to costs.
     We	 are   constrained  to	observe	 that  although	 the
judgment of  the High Court in K.L. Jain's case was rendered
as far	back as	 September 9,  1983 and	 that in the case of
G.N. Tiwari  on December  16, 1983, the directions issued by
the High Court have not been implemented so far. We hope and
trust that  the Central Government will take steps to comply
with the directions issued by the High Court forthwith.
S.R.					    Appeals allowed.
758




