

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
The Regional Director, ... vs Bata Shoe Company (P) Ltd on 11 October, 1985Equivalent citations: 1986 AIR  237, 1985 SCR  Supl. (3) 639
Author: R Pathak
Bench: Pathak, R.S.
           PETITIONER:
THE REGIONAL DIRECTOR, EMPLOYEES'STATE INSURANCE CORPORATION

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
BATA SHOE COMPANY (P) LTD.

DATE OF JUDGMENT11/10/1985

BENCH:
PATHAK, R.S.
BENCH:
PATHAK, R.S.
SEN, A.P. (J)

CITATION:
 1986 AIR  237		  1985 SCR  Supl. (3) 639
 1985 SCC  (4) 460	  1985 SCALE  (2)766


ACT:
     Employees State  Insurance	 Act,  1948  -	S.  2(22)  -
'Bonus' Whether part of wages".



HEADNOTE:
     The  respondent-company   has  two	  branch  factories.
Various agreements/settlements were entered into between the
managements of these factories and their employees regarding
the payment  of bonus  from time  to time.  The appellant  -
Regional Director  of Employees' State Insurance Corporation
- called  upon these  factories from  time to  time to	make
requisite contribution	to the	Employees'  State  Insurance
Fund.  Initially   the	managements   of   these   factories
acknowledged their  liability to deposit the amounts as part
of the	contract of  employment, but  subsequently realising
that  they   were  not	liable	in  law	 to  make  any	such
contribution under the employees' State Insurance Act, 1948,
declined to  make such	payment. The  managements  of  these
factories applied  under cl.  (g) of  sub-s. (1) of s. 75 of
the Act	 for a	decision by  the Employees'  State Insurance
Court on the question of their liability, and contended that
the sum payable or paid by way of bonus to the employees was
not covered  by the  definition of  the term "wages" in sub-
s.(22) of  s.2 of the Act and, therefore, the respondent was
not liable  to make  any contribution.	The Employees' State
Insurance Court accepted the contention of the respondent.
     Against that  order  the  appellant  preferred  appeals
under S.82  of the  Act, which	were dismissed	by the	High
Court holding  that the Employees' State Insurance Court was
right in  taking the view that the bonus in question did not
form part  of the wages as defined in sub-s. (22) of s. 2 of
the Act.
     Dismissing the appeals of the appellant to this Court,
^
HELD: 1. The bonus in question, in the instant appeals, does
not fall  under any  category  or  class  mentioned  in	 the
definition of "wages" set forth in sub-s.(22) of S. 2 of the
Employees' State Insurance Act, 1948. [645 E]
640
     In the  instant case,  the bonus paid by the respondent
to   its employees is in the nature of ex-gratia payment or,
as has	been described	in one of the settlements, paid as a
gesture of goodwill on the part of the respondent. The bonus
in question  was neither  in the  nature of production bonus
nor incentive  bonus nor  customary bonus  nor any statutory
bonus. It  cannot be  regarded as  part of  the contract  of
employment. Although  the provisions  relating	to  it	were
included  in  the  Standing  Orders  and  Rules,  they	were
subsequently excluded  from them.  Therefore, the bonus paid
or payable  by the  respondent to  its employees  under	 the
successive settlements	and  agreements	 made  between	them
cannot be  regarded as	remuneration paid  or payable to the
employees in  fulfillment of  the terms	 of the	 contract of
employment. [644 C-F]
     2. The concept of bonus has been analysed and described
by this	 Court as  representing the  cash incentive  paid in
addition  to   wages  and  given  conditionally	 on  certain
standards of  attendance and efficiency being attained. When
wages fall  short of  the living  standard or  the  industry
makes huge profits part of which are due to the contribution
which the  workmen make in increasing production, the demand
for bonus becomes an industrial claim. It has not been shown
that this  Court has  subsequently widened  the	 concept  of
bonus to include a payment made by the employer ex-gratia or
as an  expression of goodwill towards its employees. [644 F-
H; 645 A - C]
     3. The  first category  of remuneration  falling within
the definition	of "wages"  in sub-s.(22) of S. 2 of the Act
is not	satisfied by  the bonus	 in question  in the instant
appeals. The  second category of remuneration defined within
the expression	"wages" by  sub-s.(22) of  S. 2	 of the	 Act
speaks of  other additional  remuneration paid	at intervals
not exceeding two months. The bonus under consideration here
is not	paid at	 intervals not	exceeding two  months. It is
payable within	"one month  after the  end of each quarter".
[645 C-E]
     Muir Mills	 Co. Ltt.  v. Suti  Mills ,  [1955] 1 S.C.R.
991; Shree  Minakshi Mills  Ltd.  v.  Their  Workmen  [1958]
S.C.R. 878; and Standard Vacuum Refining Co. of India v. Its
Workmen	 and Anr., [1961] 3 S.C.R. 536 relied on.



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION : Civil Appeal No. 741-42
of 1978.
     From the Judgment and Order dated 2.5,1975 of the Patna
High Court in Appeals from Original Orders Nos. 92 and 93 of
1971.
641
     Abdul Khader,  R.N. Kapoor	 and Miss  A. Subhashini for
the Appellants.
     G.B. Pai, Parveen Kumar, Anil Kumar Sharma and P.R. Das
for the Respondent.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     PATHAK, J.	 These appeals by special leave are directed
against the  common judgment  and order	 of the	 Patna	High
Court dismissing two appeals filed by the Regional Director,
Employees'  State  Insurance  Corporation  on  the  question
whether the  respondent is  liable to pay the disputed bonus
to its workmen.
     The respondent,  Bata Shoe	 Company  (P)  Ltd.,  has  a
branch factory	at Digha  Ghat and another at Mokamah in the
State of  Bihar. At  the Digha	Ghat branch,  the respondent
entered in  to a settlement with its workmen on May 6, 1947,
in which  it was agreed that production bonus payable to the
workmen would  remain unaltered	 but employees	earning less
than Rs 200 would get an extra bonus called "good attendance
bonus" at  5% of their yearly salary provided they completed
active service for 265 days annually inclusive of Saturdays.
It was	stipulated that attendance bonus would be calculated
in the	same way  as production	 bonus On  November 28, 1951
there was  an agreement	 by which  it was  agreed that	"the
system of  attendance  bonus  for  the	year  1952  will  be
discontinued and  the ex-gratia	 bonus's percentage  will be
increased by  5%, i.e.	instead of 10% it will be 15% to all
employees." It	was also  agreed that  corresponding changes
would be  made in  the Standing Orders and Rules in order to
incorporate these  changes  Later,  another  settlement	 was
recorded,  this	  time	before	 the  Chairman,	  Industrial
Tribunal, Bihar,  in a	pending	  Reference of 1955 where it
was mentioned that the respondent had agreed to increase the
general bonus,	effective from	the first  quarter of  1957,
from 15%  to 16%  Thereafter on	 July  27,  1961  there	 was
another settlement which provided
	  "In view of the overall satisfactory settlement on
	  all the  outstanding points  of the  Union and  of
	  those points	raised by  the	management,  as	   a
	  gesture of  good will the management declared that
	  with effect  from 3rd	 quarter of 1961 the General
	  Bonus will  be increased  from 16-1/2%  to 17-1/2%
	  The  workmen's  representatives  appreciated	this
	  gesture   of	  the	management   and   expressed
	  satisfaction on  behalf  of  the  workman  on	 the
	  increase of General Bonus."
642
This was  followed by  a further settlement dated January 9,
1963 arrived  at in  the course	 of conciliation proceedings
before	 the	Conciliation	Officer-cum-Deputy    Labour
Commissioner, Bihar. It provided that :
	  "BONUS:
	  The rate  of payment	of bonus, effective from 4th
	  quarter of 1962 will stand revised at 19% in place
	  of 17-1/2%  as at  present. The  payment of  bonus
	  will be  made one  month after  the  end  of	each
	  quarter at  the rate	of 19%	of the	total salary
	  and/or wages	paid to	 each workman  and  employee
	  during the  quarter immediately   preceding  (such
	  salary or wages are exclusive of any other special
	  allowance or	rewards granted	 to him	 during such
	  period). Such	 bonus will be payable only to those
	  who have  completed six  months' approved  service
	  ending on  the last  day of  the quarter;  and  to
	  those who  have completed  less than	six  months'
	  approved service  on the  last day of the quarter,
	  the bonus  will be  payable at the rate of 19-1/2%
	  of their  total salary  or wages as aforesaid. The
	  bonus will  be avail able only to those who are in
	  the employ  of the  company on the last day of the
	  quarter and  who have	 given regular	and approved
	  service during the quarter to which the payment of
	  bonus is available.'
The last  document recording  a settlement is dated July 17,
1963, and  pursuant to	it the bonus clause was deleted from
the Standing Orders and Rules.
     The facts	relating to the respondent's Mokamah factory
are substantially  similar, except that the bonus scheme was
not incorporated  at any  time in  the Standing	 Orders	 and
Rules.
     The respondent  company at its two factories, Digha and
Mokamah, was  called upon  from time to time by the Regional
Director, Employees' State Insurance Corporation to make the
requisite contribution	to the	Employees'  State  insurance
Fund.  At  first,  the	managements  of	 the  two  factories
acknowledged their  liability to deposit the amounts as part
of the	contract of  employment, but subsequently realising,
as they allege, that they were not liable in Law to make any
such contribution  under the  Employees' State Insurance Act
1948, they declined to make such
643
payment. Apprehending  coercive methods	 of recovery  on the
part of	 the appellant, the managements of the two factories
applied under  the cl.(g)  of sub-s.(l)	 of s. 75 of the Act
for a  decision by  the employees'  Insurance Court  on	 the
question  of   their  liability.   The	contention   of	 the
respondent was	that the sum payable or paid by way of bonus
to the	employees was  not covered  by the definition of the
term wages in sub-s. (22) of s. 2 of the Act and, therefore,
the respondent	was not liable to make any contribution. The
employees' State  Insurance Court accepted the contention of
the respondent.	 Against that  order the  Regional Director,
Employees'  State  Insurance  Corporation,  Patna  preferred
appeals under  s. 82  of the  Employees' State Insurance Act
1948, and  the appeals have been dismissed by the Patna High
Court by  its judgment and order dated May 2, 1975. The High
Court has held that the employees' State Insurance Court was
right in  taking the view that the bonus in question did not
form part  of the wages as defined in sub-s. (22) of s. 2 of
the Employees'
State Insurance Act, 1948.
The contribution payable by an employer under the Employees'
State Insurance	 Act, 1948 is computed with reference to the
wages of  the  employee,  and  in  these  appeals  the	only
question is  whether the bonus paid by the respondent to its
employees at the Digha Ghat and the Mokamah branch factories
under the  settlements mentioned  earlier can be regarded as
wages as  defined by  sub-s. (22) of s. 2 of the Act. Sub-s.
(22) of s. 2 defines wages as follows:-
	  "(22)	 wages"	  means	 all  remuneration  paid  or
	  payable in cash to an employee if the terms of the
	  contract of  employment, express  or implied, were
	  fulfilled and	 includes any payment to an employee
	  in respect  of any  period  of  authorised  leave,
	  lock-out, strike  which is not illegal or lay-of f
	  and other additional remuneration, if any, paid at
	  intervals not	 exceeding two	months but  does not
	  include
	  (a) any  contribution paid  by the employer to any
	  Pension fund or provident fund, or under this Act;
	  (b) any  travelling allowance	 or the value of any
	  travelling concession;
	  (c) any  sum paid to the person employed to defray
	  special expenses  entailed on him by the nature of
	  his employment; or
644
	  (d) any gratuity payable on discharge."
     The entire	 argument of  the appellants before the High
Court was  that the bonus paid or payable to the employee by
the respondent	was in	the nature  of remuneration  paid in
cash to	 the  employees	 under	the  express  terms  of	 the
contract of  employment.  In  other  words,  the  appellants
relied on  that part.  of the  definition of  "wages"  which
speaks of  "all remuneration  paid or payable, in cash to an
employee, if  the  terms  of  the  contract  of	 employment,
express	 or   implied,	were   fulfilled".  Before  us,	 the
appellants rely	 on the	 same provision	 in the	 definition.
They also  rely on  that part of the definition which speaks
of "wages"  as "other  additional remuneration, if any, paid
at intervals  not exceeding  two months.....". The remaining
provision of  the definition  were not	relied	on.  We	 are
therefore, called  upon to  consider whether  the  bonus  in
question satisfies  the terms  of either of the two kinds of
remuneration mentioned above.
     It is  plain from	what has  gone before that the bonus
paid by	 the respondent to its employees is in the nature of
ex-gratia payment  or, as  has been  described in one of the
settlements, it	 is paid as has been described in one of the
settlements, it is paid as a gesture of goodwill on the part
of the respondent. It is nothing else. In cannot be regarded
as  part   of  the  contract  of  employment.  Although	 the
provisions relating  to it  were included  in  the  Standing
Orders and Rules, they were subsequently excluded from them.
In our	opinion, therefore  , the  bonus paid  or payable by
the  respondent	  to  its  employees  under  the  successive
settlements and	 agreements  made  between  them  cannot  in
fulfilment of  the terms  of the of employment. Although the
provisions relating  to it  were included  in  the  Standing
Orders and Rules, they were subsequently excluded from them.
In our opinion, there fore, the bonus paid or payable by the
respondent to its employees under the successive settlements
and agreements	made between  them. cannot  be	regarded  as
remuneration paid  or payable to the employees in fulfilment
of the terms of the contract of employment.
     The concept of bonus has received the attention of this
Court in a series of cases, and we need mention only some of
the. One  of the  first	 authoritative decisions rendered by
this Court  is	 Muir Mill  Co. Ltd.  v. Suti Mill, [1955] 1
S.C.R. 991, where N. H. Bhagwati, J. speaking for the Court,
analysed  the	concept	 of  bonus  and	   described  it  as
representing the  cash incentive  paid in  addition to wages
and given  conditionally on  certain standards of attendance
and efficiency being attained. When wages  fall short of the
living standard	 or the	 industry makes huge profits profits
part	of which are due to the contribution
645
Which the  workmen make in increasing production, the demand
for   bonus, it	 was said,  becomes an industrial claim. The
view was followed by this Court in the Shri Meenakahi Mills,
Ltd. v.	 Their Workmen,	 [1958]	 S.C.R.	 878,  but  the	 two
conditions, that  the wages  paid to  workmen fall  short of
living wages  and that	the industry should be shown to have
wade profits which are partly the result of the contribution
made by	 the workmen  in increasing production were regarded
as being  of cumulative significance. Then followed Standard
Vacuum	Refining   Co.	of  India  v.	 Its  Workmen	 and
Ant.,[1961] 3  S.C.R. 536,  which dealt	 with the concept of
bonus elaborately  while re-affirming  what had been said in
the earlier two cases. It has not been shown to us that this
Court has  subsequently widened	 the  concept  of  bonus  to
include a  payment made	 by the	 employer ex-gratia or as an
expression of goodwill towards its employees. It seems to us
clear that the first category of remuneration falling within
the definition	of "wages"  in sub-s.(22)  of 8.  2  of	 the
Employees' State Insurance Act, 1948 is not satisfied by the
bonus in question in these appeals.
     The second	 category of remuneration defined within the
expression " wages" by sub-s. (22) of 8. 2 of the Act speaks
of other  additional  remuneration  paid  at  intervals	 not
exceeding two  months. It  cannot be disputed that the bonus
under consideration  here  is  not  paid  at  intervals	 not
exceeding two months. It is payable "one month after the end
of each quarter" .
     We have  carefully perused	 the terms of the definition
of "wages"  set	 forth	in  sub-s.  (22)  of  8.  2  of	 the
Employees' State  Insurance Act,  1948, and we are satisfied
that the  bonus in  question in	 these appeals does not fall
under any category or class mentioned in the definition.
     In the  result, we find ourselves in agreement with the
high Court, and therefore we dismiss the appeals with costs.
A.P.J.					  Appeals dismissed.
646




