

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Kirpal Singh, M.L.A vs Uttam Singh & Anr on 9 October, 1985Equivalent citations: 1986 AIR  300, 1985 SCR  Supl. (3) 622
Author: O C Reddy
Bench: Reddy, O. Chinnappa (J), Venkataramiah, E.S. (J), Eradi, V. Balakrishna (J), Misra, R.B. (J), Khalid, V. (J)
           PETITIONER:
KIRPAL SINGH, M.L.A.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
UTTAM SINGH & ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT09/10/1985

BENCH:
REDDY, O. CHINNAPPA (J)
BENCH:
REDDY, O. CHINNAPPA (J)
VENKATARAMIAH, E.S. (J)
ERADI, V. BALAKRISHNA (J)
MISRA, R.B. (J)
KHALID, V. (J)

CITATION:
 1986 AIR  300		  1985 SCR  Supl. (3) 622
 1985 SCC  (4) 621	  1985 SCALE  (2)749


ACT:
     Constitution of  India, 1950 - Article 191 (1) (a) read
with section  10 of  the Representation	 of the	 People Act,
1951  Disqualification	 for  membership,  applicability  to
Public Sector  Undertakings -  Right to be elected and Right
to speak  for the  people are  questions to  be	 decided  by
Parliament and	not by	the Court - Nature of interim orders
to be  passed by  the Court  in an  election appeal when the
election was set aside on grounds not covered by part VII of
the Act, explained.



HEADNOTE:
     The appellant  Kirpal Singh  was elected  to the Punjab
Legislative  Assembly	from  Majitha  constituency  at	 the
general elections  held in  1972. His election was set aside
by High	 Court in  an Election	Petition filed by one of the
defeated candidates  on the ground that the nomination paper
of  another   candidate	 was   improperly  rejected  by	 the
Returning Officer  for the  reason that he was a development
officer in  the employment of the Life Insurance Corporation
under whose Staff Regulations he was prohibited from seeking
election. The  High Court  was of  the view  that the  staff
regulations could,  at best,  make Basant  Singh  liable  to
disciplinary action  only. In  the appeal under section 116A
of the	Representation of  the People  Act, 1951,  the Court
passed an interim order enabling the appellant to attend the
assembly and sign the register, without participating in the
proceedings or voting, and without drawing any remuneration.
Subsequent to  the filing  of the  appeal, there  were three
general elections  with the  result the appeal became wholly
infructuous.
     Disposing of the appeal, the Court,
^
     HELD : 1.1. Where an election is set aside for no fault
of the	duly elected  candidate, such  as a corrupt practice
committed by him or his agent or a disqualification suffered
by him, but on the ground that someone else's nomination had
been improperly rejected, the more appropriate interim order
would perhaps  be to  grant an	absolute stay  so  that	 the
Constituency may not go unrepresented for no fault of either
the elected or those who elected. [624 C-D]
623
     1.2 The  awarding of  the costs  by the  High Court, in
such circumstances  is	uncalled  for.	The  appellant	will
receive his   remuneration  for the  period for which he was
elected as a legislator. [626 C-D]
     1.3 The clear and undoubted object of Article 191(1)(a)
to (e)	and the	 provisions of	the  Representation  of	 the
People Act (including section 10) is the preservation of the
purity and  integrity of  the election process by preventing
Government or  State  employees	 from  taking  part  in	 the
elections. Nowadays  the activities  of	 the  State  are  so
manifold and prolific that the State has been forced, in the
interests of  better management	 and administration  and  in
order to  further the  Directive Principles of State Policy,
to  set	  up  various	Corporations  which   are  but	mere
instrumentalities of  the State.  Whether the  principle  of
Article 191(1)(a)  has to  be extended to employees of State
Corporations  and   other  Public   Sector  Undertakings  by
suitable legislation is a question of policy better left to,
be decided  by the  elected representatives  of	 the  people
themselves and	not to	the Court whose decision can only be
confined to interpretation. [625 E-H; 626 A]
     The Court recommended to the Government to have several
questions posed	 before it  examined by	 the Law  Commission
early.)



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION :  Civil Appeal  No.	 650
(NCE) of 1975.
     From the  Judgment and  Order dated  14.3. 1975  of the
Punjab and Haryana High Court in Election Petition No. 27 of
1972.
     R.K.  Garg,  A.K.	Ganguli,  M.M.	Kshatriya  and	Mrs.
Vandana Sharma for the Appellant.
     G.L. Sanghi,  P.H. Parekh	and  P.K.  Manohar  for	 the
Respondents .
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     CHINNAPPA REDDY,  J. Shri	Kirpal Singh  was elected to
the Punjab Legislative Assembly from Majitha Constituency at
the general  elections held  in 1972.  His election  was set
aside by  High Court in an Election Petition filed by one of
the defeated  candidates on  the ground	 that the nomination
paper of  another candidate  was improperly  rejected by the
Returning Officer. The
624
nomination paper  of One  Basant Singh	had been rejected on
the ground  that Basant	 Singh was  a development officer in
the employment	of the	Life Insurance	Corporation and	 was
therefore ineligible  to seek election to the Assembly under
the Staff Regulations of the Life Insurance Corporation. The
High Court  took the  view that	 if Basant  Singh defied the
Staff Regulations  and sought  election to  the Assembly  he
might have  made himself  liable to  disciplinary action but
that did  not disqualify  him from  seeking election  to the
Assembly. So  the nomination  paper of Basant Singh was held
to have	 been improperly rejected and the election of Kirpal
Singh was  set aside.  His election having been set aside he
appealed  to   this  Court   under  Section   116-A  of	 the
Representation	of  the	 People	 Act.  While  admitting	 the
appeal, this  Court  made  an  interim	order  enabling	 the
appellant to  attend the  Assembly and	sign  the  register,
without participating  in  the	proceedings  or	 voting	 and
without drawing	 any remuneration.  With-  out	meaning	 any
disrespect to  the learned judges who made the interim order
we think that where an election is set aside for no fault of
his, such  as a	 corrupt practice  committed by	 him or	 his
agent or  a disqualification  suffered by  him, but  on	 the
ground that  someone else's  nomination had  been improperly
rejected, the  more appropriate	 order would  perhaps be  to
grant an  absolute stay	 so that the Constituency may not go
unrepresented for  no fault  of either	the elected or those
who elected.
     Subsequent to the filing of the appeal, there have been
three more  general elections.	The present  appeal has thus
become wholly  infructuous, indeed  a sad  commentary on the
legal process.	Though the  question raised  is an important
one which  may arise again and again in the future we do not
propose to make any pronouncement upon it since we think the
matter is  one which should receive the consideration of the
Parliament and	suitable legislation  be enacted. Under Art.
191(1) of  the Constitution  a person  shall be disqualified
for being  chosen  as,	and  for  being,  a  member  of	 the
Legislative Assembly or Legislative Council of a State -
	  (a) if  he holds  any office	of profit  under the
	  Government of India or the Government of any State
	  specified in	the First  Schedule, other  than  an
	  office declared by the Legislature of the State by
	  law not to disqualify its holder ;
	  (b) if  he  is  of  unsound  mind  and  stands  so
	  declared by a competent court;
625
	  (c) if he is an undischarged insolvent;
	  (d) if  he is	 not a	citizen	 of  India,  or	 has
	  voluntarily acquired	the citizenship of a foreign
	  State,  or   is  under   any	acknowledgement	  of
	  allegiance or adherence to a foreign State;
	  (e) if  he is	 so disqualified by or under any law
	  made by Parliament.
Chapter III  of the  Representation of	the People Act which
certainly is  a law made by Parliament within the meaning of
Art. 191(1)(e)	of the	Constitution enumerates some further
grounds of disqualification for membership of Parliament and
State Assemblies.  In particular  we may refer to Section 10
which says,
	  "Disqualification  for   office  under  Government
	  Company -  A person  shall be disqualified If, and
	  for so long as, he is a managing agent, manager or
	  secretary of	any company  or	 corporation  (other
	  than a  co-operative society)	 in the	 capital  of
	  which the appropriate Government has not less than
	  twenty-five per cent share."
     The clear and undoubted object of Art. 191(1)(a) to (e)
and the	 provisions of	the Representation of the People Act
(including sec.	 10) is	 the preservation  of the purity and
integrity of  the election  process by preventing Government
or State  employees from  taking part  in the elections. But
then sec.  10 appears to confine the disqualification, in so
far as	it relates  to employees  of Government Companies to
the 'top-brass'	 only if  such an  uncouth expression may be
allowed to  creep into the judgment of a Court. Nowadays the
activities of  the State  are so  manifold and prolific that
the State  has been  forced,  in  the  interests  of  better
management and	administration and  in order  to further the
Directive Principles  of State	Policy, to  set	 up  various
Corporations which  are but  mere instrumentalities  of	 the
State. Is  the	principle  of  Art.  191(1)(e)	then  to  be
extended to employees of State Corporations also by enacting
appropriate laws  under Art.  191(1)(e)? Or are employees of
Public Corporations to be treated differently from employees
of the Government? Are not some of them in a better position
to exert undesirable pressure, than Government employees? On
the other hand, are a tremendously large number of employees
of Public Corporations to be denied the opportunity of being
chosen, as representatives of the People? Do
626
all the	 considerations applicable  to Government  Employees
equally apply to employees of Public Sector Undertakings? Is
there no  distinguishing feature. Are a large mass of highly
or moderately  literate people	to be  denied the  right  to
speak for  the people?	Is the	right to  be elected,  to be
confined, without  meaning any	disrespect to  anyone to the
professional politicians  only? These  are some of the vital
questions posed	 and  which  require  to  be  answered.	 The
answer	should be best given  by the elected representatives
of the	people themselves.   We	 are   not   shirking	 the
decision of  these questions  but our  decision can  only be
confined to  interpretation. Not  so, Parliament  which	 can
decide upon  the Policy.  That is  why, we  recommend to the
Government to have the matter examined by the Law Commission
very early. When a suitable occasion arises in the future we
will, of  course, deal	with the  matter, probably helped by
new legislation.
     The High Court has awarded costs against the appellant.
That was  uncalled for. We set aside that part of the order.
We express  no opinion on the other questions. The appellant
will receive  his remuneration	for the	 period for which he
was elected as a legislator.
S.R.
627
