

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Dr. Karan Singh vs State Of Jammu & Kashmir & Anr on 20 December, 1985Equivalent citations: 1986 AIR  585, 1985 SCR  Supl. (3)1069
Author: V Tulzapurkar
Bench: Tulzapurkar, V.D.
           PETITIONER:
DR. KARAN SINGH

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF JAMMU & KASHMIR & ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT20/12/1985

BENCH:
TULZAPURKAR, V.D.
BENCH:
TULZAPURKAR, V.D.
PATHAK, R.S.

CITATION:
 1986 AIR  585		  1985 SCR  Supl. (3)1069
 1986 SCC  (1) 541	  1985 SCALE  (2)1467


ACT:
     Wealth Tax Act, 1957, s.5(1)(xiv) - Claim for exemption
in respect  of jewellery  and valuable	articles of personal
use lying in Toshakhana - Assessee in wealth tax proceedings
claiming ownership  - State  contesting	 the  claim  -	CBDT
informing assessee  to arrange	physical inspection  -	High
Court approached  with application  for inspection - Refusal
of inspection  by High	Court -	 Validity of - Necessity for
inspection indicated.



HEADNOTE:
     The appellant  filed a  writ petition in the High Court
claiming  ownership   and  title  of  six  boxes  containing
jewellery and  other valuable  articles	 lying	in  Srinagar
Toshakhana. These  were kept  under lock  and  seal  of	 the
Commissioner appointed	by the	High Court. The petition was
the result  of two  matters pending before the Government of
India: (1)  Whether the	 appellant  was	 the  owner  of	 the
jewellery or  other valuable  articles of personal use lying
in those  boxes	 on  the  ground  that	the  properties	 are
heirlooms, and	(ii) whether  exemption in  respect of	such
items of  properties as	 heirlooms under  s.5(1)(xiv) of the
Wealth Tax  Act in  wealth tax assessment proceedings of the
appellant as  HUF was available to him or not. Pursuant to a
request and  the suggestion  of the  Central Board of Direct
Taxes to  have physical	 inspection of the items in question
by the	Members	 (W.T.&J)  alongwith  experts  to  establish
whether the  properties are heirlooms or not, an application
was accordingly	 moved before  the High Court for inspection
of  the	  jewellery  and  other	 articles.  The	 High  Court
dismissed the  application on  the  ground  that  no  useful
purpose will be served to grant inspection.
     Being aggrieved,  the appellant appealed to this Court.
The appeal was opposed by counsel for the Respondents on the
grounds (i) that the appellant's claim of ownership or title
to these  items has  been refuted  in the  counter-affidavit
that had been filed in the main Writ Petition where property
has been  claimed to  be State property; (2) that unless the
appellant showed  some prima  facie title to the property in
question, inspection  would be	premature and  uncalled for,
and (3)	 that the  writ petition itself was not maintainable
in view of Article 363 (1) of the Constitution.
1070
     Allowing the appeal,
^
     HELD: 1(i)	 The order  dated July	20, 1985  is clearly
erroneous, and inspection sought ought to have been granted.
The six	 boxes containing  the jewellery  and other valuable
articles lying	in Srinagar  Toshakhana shall  be opened for
the purpose  of inspection  by the  Member, Central Board of
Direct Taxes  (WT&J) who will be accompanied by the Director
General of Archaelogical Survey of India, Director Antiques,
Director National  Museum and  Approved Valuers of Jewellery
for determining	 whether any and if so what items constitute
heirlooms or  articles of  personal use of the appellant and
his family. Such inspection will be taken in the presence of
the appellant's	 representative as  also a representative of
the State Government but such representatives shall not work
on the	panel of  the Inspection  Committee but	 may  render
assistance as may be necessary. [1073 E-G]
     (ii) The  relevance and necessity of such inspection in
the instant  case cannot be disputed. The main issue arising
between the  parties is	 whether  the  jewellery  and  other
valuable articles of personal use contained in the six boxes
lying in  Srinagar Toshakhana are heirlooms of the appellant
and his	 family as claimed by him or not. Such inspection by
experts will  unquestionably facilitate	 its  determination.
[1072 B-C]
     2. Questions  of maintainability  of the  writ petition
and appellant's	 title to  the property	 in  question  would
undoubtedly be	gone into  at the  final hearing of the writ
petition but  it cannot	 be gainsaid  that the inspection by
experts will  be useful for determination of the appellant's
title to  the property.	 At this stage no one can proceed on
the assumption	that the  preliminary objection	 as  regards
maintainability will  necessarily be  upheld  Moreover,	 the
assessment order  for the 3 assessment years, 1978-79, 1979-
80 and	1980-81 though	made on protective basis and subject
to final  valuation of	the assets,  clearly show  that	 the
Wealth Tax Authorities, and the CBDT are treating the estate
lying in  the Srinagar	Toshakhana as  property belonging to
the appellant's family. [1072 F-H; 1073 A]



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION : Civil Appeal No. 5720 of
1985.
     From the Judgment and Order dated 20.7.1985 of the J. &
K. High	 Court in  CMP No.  645 of  1985 in  W.P. No. 122 of
1983.
     Soli J.  Sorabjee, J.B.  Dadachanji,  F.H.	 Talyarkhan,
S.P.  Gupta,  Mrs.  A.K.  Verma	 and  D.N.  Mishra  for	 the
Appellant.
1071
     B. Datta,	Additional Solicitor  General, Gauri Shankar
S.N. Kacker,  R.N. Poddar,  Ms. A.  Subhashini, M. Beg, E.C.
Agarwala, Z.A.	Shah, Pradeep Bakshi and Lalit Gupta for the
Respondents.
     The Order of the Court was delivered by
     TULZAPURKAR, J. Leave granted.
     Heard Counsel  for the  parties as	 also for  CBDT	 and
Wealth Tax Officer.
     The short	question raised	 in this  appeal is  whether
inspection of  the jewellery  and other valuable articles of
personal use  contained	 in  six  boxes	 lying	in  Srinagar
Toshakhana -  which boxes are at present kept under lock and
seal of	 the Commissioner  appointed by the J & K High Court
under its  order  dated	 June  22,  1984  -  was  improperly
declined by the learned Single Judge by his order dated July
20, 1985  pending disposal of the main writ petition no. 122
of 1984.  The learned  Judge has  rejected  the	 appellant's
prayer for inspection by observing thus:
	  "Be  that   as  it  may,  at	this  stage  without
	  speculating on  the merits of the petition, I find
	  that no  useful purpose will be served by granting
	  relief to  the petitioner  which he  has prayed in
	  the present CMP."
     According to  the	appellant  there  were	two  matters
before the Government of India (i) whether the appellant was
the owner  of the  jewellery or	 other valuable	 articles of
personal use  lying in	those boxes  on the  ground that the
properties are	heirlooms  and	(ii)  whether  exemption  in
respect of  such items	of  properties	as  heirlooms  under
s.5(1) (xiv)  of the Wealth Tax Act in Wealth Tax Assessment
proceedings of	the appellant as HUF was available to him or
not and	 for both  these matters it was necessary to have an
inspection of  the items by experts to establish whether the
properties are	heirlooms or  not. In  fact the	 prayer	 for
inspection was	made by	 him on the basis of two letters one
dated 12th  of February	 1985 and  the other  dated 13th  of
June, 1985  issued from	 the Ministry  of  Finance,  Central
Board of  Direct Taxes,	 particularly the former wherein, in
the context  of the  appellant's application  for  exemption
under s.5(1)  (xiv), it	 was suggested	by the CBDT that the
appellant should  arrange for the physical inspection of the
items  in  question  by	 the  Member  (WT&J)  who  would  be
accompanied  by	 some  experts	such  as  Director  General,
Archaelogical Survey of India; Director Antiques,
1072
Director National  Museum and  Approved Valuers of jewellery
and others  for that  purpose. Even then the prayer for such
inspection was rejected.
     The relevance  and necessity  of such inspection in the
context of  the two  matters that  are	pending	 before	 the
Government of  India cannot be disputed, for, the main issue
arising between	 the parties  is whether  the jewellery	 and
other valuable articles of personal use contained in the six
boxes lying  in Srinagar  Toshakhana are  heirlooms  of	 the
appellant and  his family  as claimed by him or not and such
inspection by  experts will  unquestionably  facilitate	 its
determination. We,  therefore, fail  to appreciate  how	 the
learned Judge  felt that no useful purpose will be served by
the inspection sought by the appellant.
     Counsel for  the Union  of India as well as the learned
Advocate  General   of	J   &  K  appearing  for  the  State
strenuously urged  before us  that the	appellant's claim of
ownership or  title to	these items  has been refuted in the
counter affidavits  that have  been filed  in the  main writ
petition where	the property  has been	claimed to  be State
property and  in this  behalf reference was also made to one
of the	preliminary objections	raised by the Union of India
to the	maintainability of  the writ  petition on the ground
that at	 the time  of the  settlement arrived at between the
acceding Ruler	Maharaja Hari  Singh and Government of India
no such	 claim was  made and  that under  Art. 363(1) of the
Constitution  neith   Government/Merger	 agreement  nor	 any
dispute or  obligation arising	therefrom is justiciable and
therefore the  writ petition  deserves to  be dismissed.  It
was, therefore,	 urged that  unless the appellant shows some
prima facie  title to  the property  in question  inspection
would  be   premature  and   uncalled  for.   Questions	  of
maintainability of  the writ  petition and appellant's title
to the	property in  question would undoubtedly be gone into
at the	final hearing  of the writ petition but it cannot be
gain-said that	the inspection	by experts which will have a
bearing on  the nature	and character  of  the	property  in
question will be useful for determination of the appellant's
title to  the property	in case	 the  preliminary  objection
fails and at this stage no one can proceed on the assumption
that the  preliminary objection	 will necessarily be upheld.
But apart  from this,  on prima	 facie title,  the claim for
exemption under	 s.5(1)(xiv) of	 the Wealth  Tax Act  (under
both the  limbs of  the provision)  was pending	 before	 the
Wealth Tax  authorities and we are now informed that for the
three assessment years, 1978-79, 1979-80, 1980-81 assessment
orders under the Wealth Tax Act have
1073
been passed by the Wealth Tax Officer, A Ward, Jammu wherein
the estate  belonging to the appellant's family lying in the
Srinagar  Toshakhana  has  been	 valued	 at  a	considerably
enhanced figure	 over and  above the  value returned  by the
appellant in  his returns,  and the exemption claimed by him
under s.5(1)  (xiv) of	the Wealth Tax Act in respect of the
heirlooms  has	 been  declined	 and  his  estate  has	been
assessed. The  relevant portion	 in each  of the  assessment
orders in this behalf runs thus:
	  "2. The  assessee has	 claimed exemption  of	this
	  estate (estate lying in Srinagar Toshakhana) under
	  s.5(1) (xiv)	of the	W.T. Act,  1961. However,  I
	  have been  given to  understand that	the CBDT has
	  not  given   recognition  to	 the  claim  of	 the
	  assessee. Therefore, the estate is assessed."
     The appellant has challenged these assessment orders in
appeals which  are pending.  These assessment orders, though
made on	 protective basis and subject to the final valuation
of  the	  estates,  clearly   show  that   the	Wealth	 Tax
authorities, and  the CBDT,  Revenue Department, Ministry of
Finance, Government  of India  are treating the estate lying
in the	Srinagar Toshakhana  as property  belonging  to	 the
appellant's family.
     Having regard to the aforesaid facts the impugned order
dated July  20, 1985,  in our view, is clearly erroneous and
the inspection sought ought to have been granted.
     We, therefore, direct that the six boxes containing the
jewellery and  other valuable  articles	 lying	in  Srinagar
Toshakhana under  the lock  and seal  of the Commissioner of
the  High   Court  shall  be  opened  for  the	purposes  of
inspection by  the Member,  Central Board  of  Direct  Taxes
(WT&J) who  will be  accompanied by  the Director General of
Archaelogical Survey  of India,	 Director Antiques, Director
National  Museum  and  Approved	 Valuers  of  jewellery	 for
determining the	 true nature  and character  of the same and
whether any  and if  so what  items constitute	heirlooms or
articles of  personal use  of the  appellant and his family.
Such inspection	 will  be  taken  in  the  presence  of	 the
appellant's representative  as also  a representative of the
State Government  but such representatives shall not work on
the panel  of the  Inspection Committee	 but may render such
assistance as  may be necessary to the members of the panel.
The Inspection	Committee will	complete the  inspection and
submit its report to the High
1074
Court within three months from the commencement thereof. The
parties are  directed to  obtain further  directions in	 the
matter of such inspection from the High Court.
     Appeal is allowed. No costs.
M.L.A.					     Appeal allowed.
1075




