

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Balbir Singh Delhi Admn. Delhi vs D.N. Kadian, M.M. Delhi & Anr. D.N. ... on 10 December, 1985Equivalent citations: 1986 AIR  345, 1985 SCR  Supl. (3) 812
Author: B Ray
Bench: Ray, B.C. (J)
           PETITIONER:
BALBIR SINGH DELHI ADMN. DELHI

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
D.N. KADIAN, M.M. DELHI & ANR. D.N. KADIAN AND ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT10/12/1985

BENCH:
RAY, B.C. (J)
BENCH:
RAY, B.C. (J)
SEN, A.P. (J)

CITATION:
 1986 AIR  345		  1985 SCR  Supl. (3) 812
 1986 SCC  (1) 410	  1985 SCALE  (2)1258


ACT:
     Code  of	Criminal  Procedure,   1973,  s.   197(3)  -
Prosecution of member of Delhi Police Force - Prior sanction
of the Government - Whether necessary and if so, when.



HEADNOTE:
     A Complaint was filed by the Special Railway Magistrate
against	 the  appellants,  Balbir  Singh  and  Ram  Shankar,
members of  Delhi Police  Force, alleging  that	 the  Search
Memos which  were signed  by the  sub-Inspector Balbir Singh
did not bear any signature of the witness Ram Shankar at the
time when  the said  Search memos were in the custody of the
Court  and  that  they	were  interpolated  subsequently  by
getting the  same signed  by the  accused, Ram	Shankar. The
appellants  contended	before	the  Trial  Court  that	 the
aforesaid  complaint   was  not	  maintainable	since  prior
sanction as  required by  s. 197(3) Cr.P.C. was not obtained
by the	complainant  to	 prosecute  them.  The	trial  court
rejected the  contention and  the High	Court confirmed	 the
same in	 appeal by  the appellants. The High Court, however,
held that  the Notification  No. F.10/77/78-HP-II  dated 7th
April 1980  issued by  the Lt.	Governor directing  that the
provisions of  sub-s.(2) of  s. 197  "shall apply to serving
police officials of all ranks of Delhi Police Force" charged
with the  maintenance of public order, was bad in law as the
Lt. Governor had no authority to issue the said Notification
under sub-s.(3) of s. 197 Cr.P.C.
     Allowing  Criminal	  Appeal  No.	845/85	partly	 and
dismissing the other appeal,
^
     HELD: 1(i)	 The Judgment  and order  of the  High Court
declaring the  impugned	   notification dated 7th April 1980
issued by the Lt. Governor of Delhi to be ultra vires is set
aside and the learned Magistrate is directed to proceed with
the case in accordance with law. [817 F]
     (ii) By virtue of the Notification No. S.O.183(E) dated
20th March  1974, the  President empowered the Administrator
of Union Territories, i.e. Lt. Governor of Delhi to exercise
the
813
powers and  functions of the State Government as provided in
the  Code  of  Criminal	 Procedure  except  the	 powers	 and
functions provided  in sections	 8 and	477 of the said Act.
The Notification  dated 7th  April 1980	 issued by  the	 Lt.
Governor was  made in  exercise of powers conferred upon him
under sub-section  (3) of  Sec. 197  of the Code of Criminal
Procedure read	with the  Government of	 India	Notification
dated  March  20,  1974	 mentioned  before.  Therefore,	 the
Notification is not ultra vires the Constitution. [815 D-E]
     2.	 Reading  the  two  notifications  together,  it  is
crystal clear  that to start a proceeding against the member
of all	ranks of Delhi Police Officials in a Criminal Court,
previous  sanction   of	 the  Lt.  Governor  is	 imperative,
provided the offence alleged to have been  committed by such
members of  the Delhi  Police Force has been committed while
acting or  purporting to act in	 discharge of their official
duty. [815 F]
     In the  instant case,  the previous sanction of the Lt.
Governor as  provided in  Section 197 (3) Criminal Procedure
Code  was,   not  at   all  necessary	for  initiating	 the
proceedings against  the two  appellants, since	 the act  of
tampering of the Search Memos by them cannot be said to have
been done  in discharge of their official duties inasmuch as
the said Search Memos were in the custody of the Court. [817
E-F]
     Matajog Dobey  v. H.C.  Bhari,  [1955]  2	S.C.R.	925;
Pukhraj v.  State of  Rajasthan & Anr., [1973] 2 S.C.C. 701;
Bhagwan prasad	Srivastava v. N.P.Misra, [1971] 1 S.C.R. 317
and Darshan Kumar v. Sushil Malhotra & Ors.  .1980 Crl. L.J.
154 relied upon.
     Bhikhaji Vaghaji  v. L.K. Barot and Ors., 1982 Cr. L.J.
2014 approved.



JUDGMENT:
     CRIMINAL APPELLATE	 JURISDICTION: Criminal	 Appeal Nos.
844-845 of 1985.
     From the  Judgment and  Order dated  1.12.1982  of	 the
Delhi High Court in Crl. Misc. (Main) No. 551 of 1982.
     Anil Deo  Singh, R.N. Poddar and P.K. Mukharjee for the
Appellants.
     Anil Kumar Gupta, Amicus Curiae for the Respondents.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
814
     B.C.RAY, J.  The only  question involved  in these	 two
appeals	 is   whether  the  criminal  proceedings  initiated
against the  appellants, i.e. Balbir Singh Sub-Inspector and
Ram Shanker, Constable of Delhi Police Force is maintainable
in the	absence of  any prior sanction obtained from the Lt.
Governor as required under s.197 (3) of the Code of Criminal
Procedure.
 Section  197(1)  of  the  Code  of	 Criminal  Procedure
envisages that	no court  can take cognizance of any offence
alleged to have been committed by a Judge or Magistrate or a
public servant	while acting  or purporting  to act  in	 the
discharge of  his official duty without previous sanction of
the Government.	 Sub-section (2)  of  that  Section  further
provides that  no court shall take cognizance of any offence
alleged to  have been  committed by  any member of the Armed
Forces of  the Union  while acting  or purporting  to act in
discharge of  his official duty, without obtaining the prior
sanction of  the Central  Government. Sub-section (3) of the
said Section  further provides that the State Government may
by notification	 direct that  the provisions  of Sub-section
(2) shall apply, to such class or category of members of the
Forces charged	with the  maintenance of public order as may
be specified  in the  said order, and upon such notification
being made,  the provisions of Sub-section (2) will apply as
if  for	  the  expression   "Central  Government"  occurring
therein, the expression "State Government were substituted.
     The appellants  are undoubtedly  the members  of  Delhi
Police	Force.	 It  is	 also  not  in	dispute	 that  these
appellants do  not fall	 within	 the  category	of  officers
mentioned  in  Sub-Section  (1)	 of  Sec.  197	of  Criminal
Procedure  Code	 and  as  such	no  prior  sanction  of	 the
Government is  necessary in  order to  launch a	 prosecution
against these  officers. The  only question  remains  to  be
considered is  whether the  appellants being  members of the
Delhi Police  Force are	 entitled to get the benefit of Sub-
Section (3)  of Section	 197 of	 Criminal Procedure  Code by
virtue of the notification No. S.O. 183(E) dated 20th March,
1974 issued  by the  Under Secretary  of India read with the
notification  dated  7th  April,  1980	issued	by  the	 Lt.
Governor, Delhi	 under No.F.10/77/78-HP-II. Delhi is a Union
Territory within  the meaning  of Article  1 read  with	 the
First  Schedule	 to  the  Constitution	as  amended  by	 the
Constitution  (7th   amendment)	 Act   1956.  The  power  to
administer the	Union Territory	 is vested  in the President
under Article  239 of  the Constitution	 and Clause 1 of the
said Article  empowers the President to administer the Union
Territory through
815
and Administrator  to be appointed by him. The Administrator
appointed  by	the  President	under  Art.  239(1)  of	 the
Constitution   with the designation of Lt. Governor of Delhi
derives only  such  powers,  functions	and  duties  as	 are
entrusted to  him by  the President  under Art.	 239(1).  In
accordance with	 the provisions	 of this  Art	 239(1)	 the
aforesaid notification	dated 20th March, 1974 has been made
whereby the  President had  directed that the Administrators
of all	the Union  Territories other  than Arunachal Pradesh
and  Mizoram   exercise,  subject  to  the  control  of	 the
President, the	powers and discharge the functions under the
Code of	 Criminal Procedure  1973 as  mentioned in  Schedule
annexed thereto, subject to the condition mentioned therein.
The said  notification was  enforced on	 1st April, 1974. In
this  Schedule	 all  powers  and  functions  of  the  State
Government except  those conferred  by Sections 8 and 477 of
the Code  were conferred on the Administrator. Therefore, by
virtue of  this notification,  the President  empowered	 the
Administrator of  Union Territories,  i.e. Lt.	Governor  of
Delhi to  exercise the	powers and  functions of  the  State
Government as  provided in  the Code  of Criminal  Procedure
except the  powers and	functions provided in Sections 8 and
477 of	the said  Act. It also appears from the notification
dated 7th  April, 1980	that the  Lt. Governor directed that
the provisions of Sub-Section (2) of Sec.197 "shall apply to
serving police officials of all ranks of Delhi Police Force"
charged	 with	the  maintenance   of  public	order.	This
notification was  made in  exercise of powers conferred upon
the administrator  under Sub  Section (3) of Sec. 197 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure read with the Government of India
Notification Dated  March 20,  1974 mentioned before Reading
these two  notifications together,  it is crystal clear that
to start  a proceeding	against the  members of all ranks of
Deli Police Officials in a Criminal Court, previous sanction
of the	Lt. Governor  is imperative,  provided	the  offence
alleged to  have been committed by such members of the Delhi
Police Force  has been	committed while acting or purporting
to act in discharge of their official duty.
     In the  instant case the act of tampering of the Search
Memos by  the two  appellants  i.e.  Balbir  Singh  and	 Ram
Shankar cannot	be said	 to have  been done  in discharge of
their official duties inasmuch as the said Search Memos were
in the	custody of the Court. The complaint was filed by the
Special Railway	 Magistrate alleging that Search Memos which
were signed  by the  Sub-Inspector Balbir Singh did not bear
any signature  of the  witness Ram  Shankar at the time when
the said  Search Memos	were in	 the custody  of the  Court.
Subsequently, it  has been  interpolated by getting the same
signed by the accused Ram Shankar. This
816
act of	tampering and  interfering with	 the records  of the
Court by  the two  petitioners by any stretch of imagination
cannot be  said to  have been done or purported to have been
done by the petitioners in discharge of their official duty.
It is  pertinent to refer in this connection to the decision
of this Court in Matajog Dobey v. HC. Bhari, [1955] 2 S.C.R.
925, where  this Court laid down the scope of the protection
afforded by  Sec. 197  of the  Code of Criminal Procedure in
the following terms :
	  "There must be a reasonable connection between the
	  act and  the discharge  of official  duty; the act
	  must bear  such relation  to	the  duty  that	 the
	  accused  could   lay	a   reasonable,	 but  not  a
	  pretended or fanciful claim, that he did it in the
	  course of the performance of his duty."
     These observations	 have been followed by this Court in
Pukhraj v. State of Rajasthan & Anr., [1973] 2 S.C.C. 701.
     In that  case the	Post  Master  General  of  Rajasthan
abused and  kicked a  Clerk of	the Head  Post Office when a
clerk of  the Head  Post Office of Jodhpur went to make some
oral representations  to the  Post Master General. The clerk
filed a complaint against the Post Master General under Sec.
323 and	 504 I.P.C.  before the Additional Munsif Magistrate
of Jodhpur  city. An  application was  filed praying that no
cognizance  of	the  offence  would  be	 taken	without	 the
sanction of  the  Government  under  Sec.  197	of  Criminal
Procedure Code.	 It was	 held that the acts alleged were not
done in	 due discharge	of his official duty and so no prior
sanction of  the Government  was necessary under Section 197
of the Code.
 In Bhagwan	 Prasad Srivastava  v. N.P.  Misra, [1971] 1
S.C.R. 317,  the respondent  filed a complaint alleging that
the appellant,	a Civil	 Surgeon used defamatory and abusive
words and got him pushed out by the cook of the hospital. It
was found  that the  case was not covered by Sec. 197 of the
said Act  as those  acts were  not done	 in discharge of his
official duty.
     In the case of Darshan Kumar v. Sushil Kumar Malhotra &
Ors., 1980  Cr.	 L.J.  154,  it	 was  found  that  the	acts
complained of  against	Respondents  Nos.  1,3	and  4	were
purported to  have been	 done by  them in discharge of their
official duties	 and it	 was reasonably connected with their
official duties.  As such it was held that prior sanction of
the State  Government was  necessary in	 prosecuting them in
respect of the offence, if any, made out from the commission
of such acts.
817
     As regards	 scope and  ambit of Sec. 197(3) of the Code
of   Criminal Procedure	 it has been rightly observed by the
Division Bench	of the Gujarat High Court in Bhikhaji Vaghji
v. L.K	 Barot	and Ors.  1982 Cr. L.J. 2014, that after the
issuance of  the notification  by the  Government under Sec.
197(3) of  the Criminal	 Procedure Code	 directing that	 the
provisions of  Sub-Sec.(2) of  Sec. 197	 shall apply  to the
Police Officers	 charged  with	the  maintenance  of  public
order, the  same could	not be	questioned on  the ground of
non-application of  mind as it is within the scope and ambit
of Sub-Sec.  (3) of  Sec. 197  of  the	Code.  It  was	also
observed that :
	  "Before the  protection of  sub-sec.(2) of Section
	  197 of  the Code  could be had and the proceedings
	  are dropped  on that count, the learned Magistrate
	  is under  an obligation to decide that the alleged
	  acts attributed to the members of the police force
	  are acts  done in  the discharge of their official
	  duties, or  at any  rate, they  purport to  be, or
	  bear the  colour or  semblance of,  the acts	that
	  could be  done in  the discharge of their official
	  duties."
     We have already said that the alleged acts of tampering
the Search  Memo while	the same was in custody of the Court
cannot be deemed to be an act purported to have been done by
these two  appellants in discharge of their official duties.
Therefore, the	previous sanction  of the  Lt.	Governor  as
provided in  Section 197(3)  Criminal Procedure Code was, in
our considered	opinion, not at all necessary for initiating
the proceedings	 against  these	 two  appellants,  who	are-
members of  the Delhi  Police Force.  For the reasons stated
hereinbefore the  Appeal filed	by the	Delhi Administration
succeeds and  is allowed and the Appeal filed by the accused
is dismissed.  The Judgment  and Order	of  the	 High  Court
declaring the  impugned notification  dated 7th	 April, 1980
issued by the Lt. Governor of Delhi to be ultra vires is set
aside and the learned Magistrate is directed to proceed with
the case in accordance with law.
     We are  thankful  to  Sri	Anil  Kumar  Gupta  for	 the
assistance he has rendered as Amicus Curiae.
M.L.A.			   Criminal Appeal 844/85 dismissed.
		      Criminal Appeal 845/85 partly allowed.
818
