

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Ram Pyare vs Ram Narain & Others on 15 February, 1985Equivalent citations: 1985 AIR  694, 1985 SCR  (2) 918
Author: O C Reddy
Bench: Reddy, O. Chinnappa (J)
           PETITIONER:
RAM PYARE

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
RAM NARAIN & OTHERS

DATE OF JUDGMENT15/02/1985

BENCH:
REDDY, O. CHINNAPPA (J)
BENCH:
REDDY, O. CHINNAPPA (J)
VENKATARAMIAH, E.S. (J)
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)

CITATION:
 1985 AIR  694		  1985 SCR  (2) 918
 1985 SCC  (2) 162	  1985 SCALE  (1)262


ACT:
     U. P.  Zamindari Abolition & Land Reforms Act 1950, ss.
134 and	 137 Vendor  deposited money  to  acquire  Bhumidari
right-Land sold	 on representation  that he  had such rights
but before  obtaining certificate  of Bhumidari rights-Sale-
Whether valid-Vendee,  whether entitled	 to  invoke  s.	 43.
T.P.. Act.
      Transfer	of   Property Act,  s. 43-Vendor  depositing
money for  acquiring Bhumidari	rights over  land-Sale	Deed
executed making	 erroneous representation  that	 vendor	 had
Bhumidari  rights-Certificate  of  Bhumidari  rights  issued
subsequently-Whether s. 43 applicable.



HEADNOTE:
      Section  134(1) of  the U.P.  Zamindari Abolition	 and
Land Reforms  Act 1950	provides that  if a  Sirdar  (tenure
holder) deposits  with the  State Government an amount equal
to ten	times the  land	 revenue  payable  on  the  date  of
application for	 the land  of which he is a Sirdar, he shall
be entitled  with effect  from the  date on which the amount
has been  deposited, to	 a declaration	that he has acquired
the rights  mentioned in  sec. 137  in respect of such land.
Sec. 137  as it stood before amendment in 1962 provided that
the Sirdar  shall become  a bhumidhar from the date of grant
of a  certificate by  the Assistant Collector under sub-sec.
(1).
      The  vendor Who  had Sirdari  rights over the disputed
land deposited	the required  amount on	 28th Oct. 1961 u/s.
134 of the Act in order to acquire Bhumidari rights over the
land. He  sold the  land to  the appellant  on the  same day
while he  was granted  certificate of  Bhumidari rights u/s.
137  of	  the  Act   on	 30th  Oct.  1961.  Thereafter,	 the
respondents, sons  of the  vendor, filed  a suit  before the
Additional Munsiff for cancellation of Sale Deed executed by
the vendor on 28th October, 1961. The suit was dismissed and
the order was confirmed in first appeal. Rut, the High Court
in second  appeal filed by the respondents decreed the suit,
holding that  the vendor  had no  right to  execute the sale
deed on	 28th	October 1961,  since he	 acquired Bhumidbari
rights w.e.f.  30th October 1961 i.e. from the date of grant
of Bhumidari Certificate and Dot from the date of deposit of
the amount.
919
      Allowing the appeal to this Court,
^
      HELD:  (l) Section 43 of the 'transfer of Property Act
embodies a  rule of  estoppel and  enacts that	a person who
makes a	 representation shall  not be  heard to	 allege	 the
contrary  as   against	 a   person   who   acts   on	that
representation. lt  mattes not	whether the transferor acted
fraudulently or	 innocently in	making	the  representation.
What is material is hat he did make a representation and the
transferee has	acted on  it. Where the transferee knew as a
fact that  the transferor did not possess the title which he
represents he has, then he cannot b said to have acted on it
when taking  a transfer.  Section  43  would  then  have  no
application and	 the transfer  will fail  under s  6(a). But
where the  transferee does  act on the representation, there
is no  reason why  he should  not have	the benefit  of	 the
equitable doctrine  embodied in	 s. 43,	 however, fraudulent
the act of the transfer or might have been. [923 G-H; 924 C-
D] C
      (2)  In the  instant case, the amount of deposit under
sec. 134  of the Act was made on October 28, 1961 and it was
on the same day that the sale deed was executed. It is clear
that the  vendor erroneously  represented to the vendee that
he was	authorized to transfer the property and professed to
transfer such property for consideration. the very execution
of the	sale deed  on the  same day  as the  deposit of	 the
requisite  amount  under  sec.	134  is	 significant  enough
establish that	the sale deed was the result of an erroneous
representation by  the Vendor.	It is  also clear  that	 the
respondents who	 are the sons of the vendor, cannot possibly
claim to  be transferees  in good faith which indeed they do
not claim  to be. Section 43 of the Transfer of Property Act
clearly applies	 to the	 situation However,  the conflict of
opinion which  rose in	the  Allahabad	High  Court  on	 the
question whether a tenant obtained Bhumidari rights from the
date of	 deposits, the	date of	 declaration or	 the date of
certificate was	 resolved by  the legislature  which amended
sec. 137(2)in  1962 and substituted the words "from the data
on  which  the	amount	referred  to  in  s.  134  has	been
deposited"  for	  the  words,	'"from	the  date  thereof."
Unfortunately the amending Act, which in the case of certain
amendments provided  that the  substituted  words  shall  be
deemed always  to have	been  so  substituted,	did  not  so
provide in  the case  of the amendment of sec. 137(2) of the
U.P. Zamindari	Abolition Act.	The result was that in cases
where the  amount  had	been  deposited	 and  a	 certificate
obtained on  different dates before the coming into force of
the 1962  amending Act,	 the position  still  was  that	 the
tenure holder  acquired bhumidari  rights with	effect	only
from the  date of  issuance of	the bhumidari	certificate.
[922 E-H; 921 F-H; 922A]
      Ram  Sawarup v. Deputy Collector, Consolidation & Ors.
I.L.R. 1971 (1) All. 698, approxed.
      Jumma  Masjid v.	Kodimaniandra Deviah,  AIR  1962  SC
847=[1962 Supp.	 2 S.C.R.  554, Official Assignee, Madras v.
Sanpath Naidu  65 MAD  LJ 588 and Dhani Ram v. Jokhu  Second
Appeal No.  4276 of  1964 [decided  by Allahabad  High Court
referred to.
920



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 1994 (N)
of 1971.
      From  the Judgment  and Order  dated 26. 11. 70 of the
High Court of Allahabad in Second Appeal NO. 4540 of 1964.
     O. P. Verma for the appellant.
      J. M. Khanna and R. A. Gupta for the Respondents.
	 S. N. Kackar appeared as amicus curiae.
	 The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
      CHINNAPPA REDDY, J. Matbar Mal, who had Sirdari rights
over the  disputed land,  deposited an	amount equal  to ten
times the  land revenue	 payable on  the land  in  order  to
acquire Bhumidhari  rights. This  he could do under sec. 134
of the	U. P. Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950
as it  then stood. The deposit was made on October 28, 1961.
On the	same day,  Matbar Mal  sold the	 land to the present
appellant. On  October 30, 1961, a certificate to the effect
that he	 had acquired Bhumidhari rights was issued to Matbar
Mal under sec. 137 of the U. P. Zamindari Abolition and Land
Reforms Act,  1950. Thereafter	the sons of Matbar Mal filed
the  suit  out	of  which  the	present	 appeal	 arises	 for
cancellation of	 the deed of sale executed  by Matbar Mal on
October 28,  1961 in  favour of the defendants. the suit was
dismissed by  the court	 of the	 Additional   Munsif and the
appeal by  the plaintiffs was also dismissed by court of the
Temporaries Civil & Sessions Judge, Deoria. On second appeal
by the plaintiffs, however, a single judge of the High Court
of Allahabad  allowed the  appeal following a Division Bench
judgment of  the same  court in	 Dhani Ram  v. Jokhu (Second
Appeal	No.  4276  of  1964)  arid  decreed  the  suit.	 The
defendant has  preferred this  appeal by special leave under
Art. 136 of the Constitution.
     ' The  ground on which the second appeal was allowed by
the High  Court	 was  that  the	 Sirdar	 who  deposited	 the
requisite amount  acquired Bhumidhari  rights not  from	 the
date of	 deposit but  from the	date of	 the  grant  of	 the
Bhumidhari  certificate,  and,	therefore,  Matbar  Mal	 who
executed the  sale deed	 on October 28, 1961 had no right to
execute the  same on  that day	as  he	acquired  Bhumidhari
rights with effect from October 30, 1961 only, which was the
date of the issuance of the Bhumidhari certificate.
921
      Before  the U. P. Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms
Act, A 1950 was amended in 1962, sec. 134 in so far as it is
relevant stood as follows:
		 "134 (1) if a sirdar belonging to the class
     mentioned in  cl.(a) of s. 131 pays or offers to pay to
     the credit	 of the	 State Government an amount equal to
     ten times	the land  revenue payable  or deemed  to  be
     payable on	 the date  of application  for the  land  of
     which he  is the  sirdar, he shall, upon an application
     duly made	in that behalf to an Assistant Collector, be
     entitled, with effect from the date on which the amount
     has been  deposited,  to  a  declaration  that  he	 has
     acquired the rights mentioned in sec. 137 in respect of
     such land.. "
 Section  137 in so far as it is relevant then stood as
follows:
	      "137 (1) If the application has been duly made
     and the  Assistant	 Collector  is	satisfied  that	 the
     applicant is  entitled to	the declaration mentioned in
     sec. 134 he shall grant a certificate to that effect.
	     (2)Upon the grant of the certificate under sub-
     sec. (1) the sirdar shall from the date thereof-
	       (a)become and the be deemed to be a bhumidhar
     of the  holing or	the share  in respect  of which	 the
     certificate has been granted, and (b)..... "
      There  was some  conflict of  opinion in the Allahabad
High
 Court	ON the	question whether  the tenant  depositing the
amount	equivalent   to	 ten  times  the  land	revenue	 and
obtaining  a  Bhumidhari  certificate,	obtained  Bhumidhari
rights from  the date of deposit, the date of declaration or
the date  of certificate  The conflict	was resolved  by the
legislature which  enacted Act 21 of 1962 which amended sec.
137 of	the  U.	 P.  Zamindari	Abolition  Act	among  other
provisions of various other enactments. In sec. 137 sub-sec.
2 of  the U. P. Zamindari Abolition Act, for the words "from
the date  thereof" were	 substituted the  words and  figures
"from the  date on  which the amount referred to in sec. 134
has been  deposited". Unfortunately  the amending Act, which
in  the	  case	of  certain  amendments	 provided  that	 the
substituted words  shall be  deemed always  to have been s:)
substituted, did not so provide in the case of the amendment
of sec. 137 (2) of the U. P. Zamindari Abolition
922
Act. The  result was that in cases where the amount had been
deposited and  a certificate  obtained	On  different  dates
before the  coming into	 force of the 1962 amending Act, the
position still was that the tenure holder acquired bhumidari
rights with  effect only  from the  date of  issuance of the
bhumidhari certificate. It was so held in Dhani Ram v. Jokhu
(supra) by  a Division Bench of the Allahabad High Court. It
was following  this decision  in Dhani	Ram's case  that the
learned single	Judge of  the High Court in the present case
allowed the  second appeal.  The decision  in Dhani  Ram  v.
Jokhu was  approved by	another Division  Bench of  the same
court consisting  of S.	 D. Khare and R. B. Misra, JJ in Ram
Swarup vs. Deputy Director, Consolidation and Ors.(1) In the
latter case the learned judges expressed the further opinion
that in	 a situation  like the one before them, there was no
reason why  recourse should  not he  had to  sec. 43  of the
Transfer of  Property Act  to feed  the title as it were, if
the necessary  conditions were	fulfilled. We agree with the
reasoning of  the learned  judges in  Ram Swarup  v.  Deputy
Director, Consolidation '- (supra). In that case, the matter
was remanded  to the  Deputy Director  of  Consolidation  to
consider the question of the applicability of sec. 43 of the
Transfer of  Property Act  and proceed	to  dispose  of	 the
matter in  accordance with  law. In  the present  case,	 the
facts speak  for themselves  and we  do not think that it is
necessary to  remand the  case to  the lower  courts  for  a
decision on  the question of the applicability of sec. 43 of
the Transfer  of Property  Act. The  amount of deposit under
sec. 134  of the  U. P.	 Zamindari Abolition Act was made on
October 28,  1961 and  it was  on the same-day that the sale
deed was executed by Matbar Mal. It is clear that Matbar Mal
erroneously represented to the vendee that he was authorised
to transfer  the property  and professed  to  transfer	such
property for  consideration. The  very execution of the sale
dead on the same day as the deposit of the requisite. amount
under sec  134 is  significant enough  to establish that the
sale deed  was the  result of an erroneous representation by
Matbar Mal. It is also clear that the present plaintiffs who
are the sons of the vender, Matbar Mal cannot possibly claim
the transferees in good faith which indeed they do not claim
to be.	Section 43  clearly applies  to the  situation.	 The
learned counsel	 for the  respondents however  attempted  to
disclaim the  applicability of	sec. 43	 of the	 Transfer of
Property Act  by   referring to Jumma Masjid v.Kodimaniandra
Deviah (2) . He
	 1. ILR 1971 (1) ALL.698.
	 2. AIR 1962 SC 847 =[1962] SUPP 2 S.C.R. 554.
923
invited our  attention to  the following observations of the
learned	 judges:
		 "Now the  compelling reason  urged  by	 the
     appellant for reading a further exception in sec. 43 is
     that if  it is  construed as applicable to transfers by
     persons who have only spes succession is at the date of
     transfer, it would have the effect of nullifying sec. 6
     (a). But  sec. 6  (a) and S. 43 relate to two different
     subjects and  there is  no necessary  conflict  between
     them. Sec 6 (a) deals within certain kinds of interests
     in property mentioned therein, and prohibits a transfer
     simpliciter of  those interests.  Sec.  43	 deals	with
     representations as	 to title  made by a transferrer who
     had no title at the time of transfer, and provides that
     the transfer  shall faston	 is self  on the title which
     the transferer  subsequently acquires.  Section  6	 (a)
     enacts a rule of substantive law, while s. 4.3 enacts a
     rule of  estoppel which  is one  of evidence.  the	 two
     provisions	 operate  on  different	 fields,  and  under
     different conditions,  and we see no ground for reading
     a conflict	 between them  or for cutting down the ambit
     of the  one by  reference to the other. In our opinion,
     both of  them can	be given  full effect  on their	 own
     terms,  in	 their	respective  spheres.  To  hold	that
     transfers by  persons who	have only a spes successions
     at the  date of  transfer are not within the protection
     afforded by  s. 43 would destroy its utility to a large
     extent."
      We are unable to see in what manner these observations
can possibly  assist the  respondents. In the same decision,
it has been observed later, referring to the decision of the
Madras High  Court in  Official Assignee,  Madras v. Sanpath
Naidu(1). F
	       "This reasoning is open to the criticism that
     it ignores the principle underlying s. 43. That section
     embodies, as  already stated,  a rule  of estoppel	 and
     enacts that  a person  who makes a representation shall
     not be heard to allege the contrary as against a person
     who acts  on  that	 representation.  It  is  immaterial
     whether the  transferer acts  bona fide or fraudulently
     in making	the representation.  It is  only material to
     find out  whether	in  fact  the  transferee  has	been
     misled. It	 is to be noted that when the decision under
     consideration was	given, the  relevant words  of s. 43
     were,
	 (1) 65 Mad, LJ, 588.
924
     "where a  person erroneously  represents", and  now, as
     amen ded  by Act  20 of  1929, they are "where a person
     fraudulently  or	erroneously  represents",  and	that
     emphasises that  for the  purpose	of  the	 section  it
     matters no whether the transferer acted fraudulently or
     innocently in  making the representations and that what
     is material  is that  he did  make a representation and
     the transferer  has acted	on it.	where the transferee
     knew as  a fact that the transferer did not possess the
     title which  he represents	 he has,  then he  cannot be
     said to  have acted  on  it  when	taking	a  transfer.
     Section 43	 would then  have  no  application  and	 the
     transfer will  fail under	s.  6  (a).  But  whore	 the
     transferee does  act on the representation, there is no
     reason why	 he should  not	 have  the  benefit  of	 the
     equitable	doctrine   embodied  in	  s.  43,   however,
     fraudulent the act of the transferer might have been "
      In  the circumstances  of the present case, we have no
doubt that  the provisions  of sec.  43 of  the Transfer  of
Property Act are clearly attracted and that is sufficient to
non-suit the  plaintiffs. The  appeal is, therefore, allowed
with costs.  The judgment of the High Court is set aside and
that of	 the lower  appellate court  restored.	Shri  S.  N.
Kacker, Senior	Advocate, was  kind enough  to assist  us as
amicus curiae. We are gratefull to him for his assistance.
M.L.A. Appeal allowed.
925
