

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Sant Raj & Anr vs O.P. Singla & Anr on 9 April, 1985Equivalent citations: 1985 AIR  617, 1985 SCR  (3) 623
Author: D Desai
Bench: Desai, D.A.
           PETITIONER:
SANT RAJ & ANR.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
O.P. SINGLA & ANR

DATE OF JUDGMENT09/04/1985

BENCH:
DESAI, D.A.
BENCH:
DESAI, D.A.
MISRA RANGNATH

CITATION:
 1985 AIR  617		  1985 SCR  (3) 623
 1985 SCC  (2) 349	  1985 SCALE  (1)668
 CITATOR INFO :
 F	    1985 SC1046	 (16)
 F	    1985 SC1128	 (10)


ACT:
     Industrial Disputes  Act ,	  1947	,   Section 25F read
with section  2(oo)-Termination	 from  service-Validity	 of-
Termination   if    held   illegal-Reinstatement    follows-
Inexpedient and	 improper to  order reinstatement-Discretion
of Court to grant compensation.
     Income Tax	 Act ,	 1961  ,  Section 89 and Income Tax.
Rules ,	 1962 ,	 Rules ,  2/(A) Compensation and back wages-
Court ordered  payment in  lump sum  - Relief of Income Tax-
Power of Court.



HEADNOTE:
     The  services   of	 the   appellants-workmen  who	were
employed as  loaders in	 a foreign air-transport company was
terminated by  the respondent-employer.	 On a reference made
by the	Secretary (Labour)  Delhi Administration  the Labour
Court  held   that  the	  termination  of  services  of	 the
appellants constituted retrenchment within the meaning of s.
25F read  with Section 2(oo) of the Industries; Disputes Act
,   1947 and  as the  provisions of  s. 25F  have  not	been
complied with  the termination	of service  would be bad and
illegal. It  was further  held that even where s. 25F of the
Act is	not complied  with and the termination of service is
illegal and  invalid ,	there is certainly a discretion with
the Labour  Court whether  to  order  reinstatement  of	 the
workmen or  not. While	quantifying the	 compensation ,	 the
Labour Court  observed that  the termination  of services of
the two	 workmen was  bonafide and not a colourable exercise
of power  in accordance	 with the  service rules and awarded
one year's  wages as  compensation for	the failure  of	 the
employer to  comply with  the requirements  of s.  25F.	 The
workmen appealed to this Court.
     Partly allowing the Appeal.
^
     HELD; 1. Ordinarily ,  where the termination of service
is found to be bad and illegal ,  in the field of industrial
relations a  declaration follows  that the workman continues
to be  in service  and has  to be reinstated in service with
full  backwages.  The  Labour  Court  has  however  ,	 the
discretion to award compensation in respect of reinstatement
if the	circumstances of a particular case ,  are unusual or
exceptional so	as  to	make  reinstatement  inexpedient  or
improper.
					    [625H ,  626A-B]
624
     2. Whenever  it is	 said that  something has to be done
within the  discretion of  the authority then that something
has to	be done according to the rules of reason and Justice
and not according to private opinion ,	according to law and
not humor.  It must  not be  arbitrary vague  and  fanciful.
[626D]
     Hindustan Tin  Works  Pvt	,    Ltd.  v.  Employees  of
Hindustan Tin  Works   Pvt. Ltd.  [1979] I  SCR 563  ,	M/s.
Hindustan Steel	 Ltd. ,	 Rourkela v. A.K Roy & Ors. [1970] 3
SCR 343	 ,   Sharp v.  Wekfield ,   [1891]  AC	173  &	S.D.
Jaisinghani v.	Union of  India &  Ors. [1967]	2 SCR  703 ,
relied on.
     3. Having	regard to the facts and circumstances of the
instant case  ,	  the reasons  given by the Labour Court for
declining to  grant the	 normal relief	of reinstatement are
not tenable.  The order	 of the Labour Court is ,  however ,
upheld. The  award giving  one year wages as compensation is
modified to  the effect	 that each  appellant should be paid
Rs. 2,00,000  as and  by way of back-wages in lieu of relief
of reinstatement. [626B-C]
     4. The Labour Court while declining to grant the relief
of reinstatement  which should	have ordinarily	 followed  ,
consequent upon	 its finding that the termination of service
was bad and illegal ,  in exercise of its discretion awarded
one year's wages as compensation in lieu of reinstatement on
the ground  that 'the  termination of service of each of the
appellant was  bonafide and  not a  colourable	exercise  of
power in  accordance with  service rules'.  There is thus an
error apparent	on the	face of	 the record.  inasmuch as if
termination of	service was  according to  service rules and
was bonafide  it could	not be	simultaneously	held  to  be
illegal	 and   invalid.	 Therefore.   this  discretion	 was
exercised on  irrelevant and  extraneous  considerations  or
considerations not  germane to	the termination.  [626F-H  ,
627Al
     5. The appellants are entitled to relief under s. 89 of
the Income  Tax Act  ,	 1961 read  with Rule  21(A) of	 the
income Tax Rules ,  1962 because compensation herein awarded
includes salary	 which was  in arrears	for 12	years and is
being paid in one lump sum under orders of Court. Respondent
employer shall	assist	the  appellants	 for  obtaining	 the
relief. [628E-F]



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: CIVIL  Appeal NO. 650 of
1982.
	   From the Award dated 6.3 1981 of the Labour Court
Delhi in IClD No. 41 Or 1979.
     P.N. Tewari and S.R. Srivastava for the Appellants.
	 Dr. Y.S. Chitale ,  Ashok Grover and David Frey for
the Respondent ,
625
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by A
     DESAI ,   J  ,  Secretary (Labour) Delhi Administration
referred  the	following  industrial  dispute	between	 the
management of  M/s Lufthansa German Airlines and its workmen
Shri Sant Raj and Shri Itwari Lal Sherya for adjudication to
the Labour Court at Delhi It reads as under
	  "Whether the termination of service of S/Shri Sant
Raj and	 Itwari Lal Sherya is illegal and or unjustified and
if so to what relief are they entitled ?"
     The Labour	 Court	after  an  exhaustive  and  in-depth
examination of	rival contentions  held that  termination of
services of  the  afore-mentioned  two	workmen	 constituted
retrenchment within  the meaning  of Sec. 25F read with Sec.
2(00) of  the Industrial  Disputes Act	,   1947 ('Act'	 for
short) and  as the  provisions of  Sec. 25F  have  not	been
complied with ,	 the termination of service would be bad and
illegal. The  Labour Court then proceeded to examine whether
the  relief   of  reinstatement	  should   be	granted	  or
compensation in	 lieu of  reinstatement should be given. The
Labour	Court	held  that  'even  where  Sec.	25F  of	 the
Industrial Disputes  Act is  not complied with and therefore
the termination	 of service  is illegal and invalid ,  there
is certainly  a discretion  with the Labour Court whether to
order reinstatement  of the  workman or	 not.' We  have	 our
serious reservations  about the	 statement of  law but it is
not necessary  to deal	with it	 in the present case because
instead of  granting reinstatement  ,	we propose  to award
adequate compensation taking into account both the backwages
as well as compensation in lieu of reinstatement.
     The Labour	 Court	while  proceeding  to  quantify	 the
compensation observed  that 'the  termination of services of
the two workmen was bonafide and not a colorable exercise of
power  in   accordance	with  the  service  rules  and	then
proceeded to award one year's wages as compensation' for the
failure of  the employer  to comply with the requirements of
provisions contained  in Sec.  25F of  the Act.	 The workmen
have filed this appeal by special leave.
     Ordinarily where the termination of service is found to
be
626
bad and	 illegal ,   in	 the field of industrial relations a
declaration follows  that the  workman continues  to  be  in
service and  has to  be	 reinstated  in	 service  with	full
backwages (See Hindustan Tin Works Pvt. Ltd. v. Employees of
Hindustan Tin  Works Pvt.  Ltd.(1). The	 Labour Court  has ,
however ,   the	 discretion to award compensation instead of
reinstatement if  the circumstances of a particular case are
unusual or  exceptional	 so  as	 to  make  reinstatement  in
expedient or  improper.(See  M/s  Hindustan  Steels  Ltd.  ,
Rourkela v. A.K. Roy & Ors.(2).
     In the  present case  ,   the Labour  Court having held
that the  termination of  services of  the appellants  would
constitute retrenchment and as the pre-requisite for a valid
retrenchment having not been satisfied ,  the termination of
service was  bad ,   yet  in the  facts of  the case  in his
discretion declined  to grant  the relief  of reinstatement.
Whenever ,   it is said that something has to be done within
the discretion	of the	authority then that something has to
be done according to the rules of reason and justice and not
according to  private opinion  ,   according to	 law and not
humour. It  is to be not arbitrary ,  vague and fanciful but
legal and  regular and it must be exercised within the limit
to which  an honest men to the discharge of his office ought
to find himself. (See Sharp v. Wekfield(3). Discretion means
sound discretion  guided by  law. It  must be  governed by ,
rule ,	 not  by humour ,  it must not be arbitrary ,  vague
and fanciful.  (See S.D.  Jaisinghani v.  Union of  India  &
Ors.(4).
     The Labour Court while declining to grant the relief of
reinstatement  which   should  have  ordinarily	 followed  ,
consequent upon	 its finding that the termination of service
was bad and illegal ,  in exercise of its discretion awarded
one year's wages as compensation in lieu of reinstatement on
the ground  that 'the  termination of service of each of the
appellant was bonafide and not a colorable exercise of power
in accordance  with service  rules.' There  is thus an error
apparent on the face of the record of the case in as much as
if the termination of service was according to service
(1) [1979] 1 SCR 563.
(2) [1970] 3 S.C.R. 343.
(3) 11891] A.C. 173.
(4) 11967] 2 S.C.R. 703 ,
627
rules and  Was bonafide	 it could not be simultaneously held
to be  illegal and  invalid. Therefore	the  discretion	 was
exercised on  irrelevant and  extraneous  considerations  or
considerations	not  germane  to  the  determination.  As  a
necessary corollary  ,	 we would  have granted	 the  normal
relief of reinstatement.
     Dr. Chitley  ,   learned counsel  who appeared  for the
respondents attempted to take us through the evidence with a
view to	 persuading us	that the  employer even	 if it acted
contrary to law ,  should not be burdened with reinstatement
because it  had	 lost  confidence  in  the  appellants.	 The
employer is  a foreign	air-transport company.	The  workmen
were loaders  posted at	 Delhi Airport.	 In this far-fetched
hierarchical relationship  ,  loss of confidence if it is to
be considered  a relevant factor would have hardly impressed
us. However  ,	as the workmen are out of job from August 30
,   1973 i.e.  roughly for  a period of 12 years ,  it is in
their own  interest ,	that  instead  of  reinstatement  in
service under  an  unwilling  if  not  a  hostile  employer.
adequate  compensation	would  meet  the  ends	of  justice.
Therefore ,   in the special facts and circumstances of this
case ,	 though	 disagreeing with  tile reasons given by the
Labour Court  for declining  to grant  the normal  relief of
reinstatement  ,     we	 uphold	 the  same  but	 the  meagre
compensation awarded  by the  Labour Court namely one year's
E. wages requires to be adequately and properly modified.
     Dr. Chiley	 gave us  information about  the last  wages
drawn by  each of  the workmen.	 That does  not take care of
over-time allowance  or bonus  or other	 benefits that	they
enjoy. Roughly	,   the monthly	 pay packet  of each workman
appears to  be around  Rs. 1,000.  Each one  of them  was  a
loader which  means doing 1' manual job. Each one of them is
entitled to backwages in full for a period of 12 years. Each
one was therefore entitled to get Rs. 1,50,000 towards back-
wages.	Adding	 to  it	  the  compensation   in   lieu	  of
reinstatement in  the amount  of Rs.  50,000, we  are of the
opinion that  a total  compensation in	the  amount  of	 Rs.
2,00,000 to each appellant would meet the ends of justice.
     Before we	conclude this  judgment ,   we would like to
make it	 abundantly  clear  that  the  compensation  of	 Rs.
2,00,000 [I awarded to each appellant includes backwages for
a period of
628
12 years.  Now that the amount is being paid in one lump sum
,   it is likely that the employer may take recourse to Sec.
192 of	the Income  Tax Act ,  1961 which provides that when
any person  responsible for  paying  any  income  chargeable
under the  head 'Salaries' shall ,  at the time of payment ,
deduct income  tax on the amount payable at the average rate
of income-tax  computed on  the basis  of the rates in force
for the	 financial year	 in which  the payment is made ,  on
the estimated  income of  the assessee	under this  head for
that financial	year. If  therefore the employer proceeds to
deduct the  income tax	as provided  by Sec. 192 ,  we would
like to	 make it  abundantly clear that each appellant would
be entitled  to the  relief under  Sec. 89 of the Income Tax
Act which provides that where ,	 by reason of any portion of
assessee's salary  being paid in arrears or in advance or by
reason of  his having  received in  any one  financial	year
salary for  more than 12 months or a payment which under the
provisions of  clause (3)  of Section 17 is a profit in lieu
of salary  ,   his income  is assessed at a rate higher than
that it would otherwise have been assessed ,  the Income-tax
Officer shall  on an  application made to him in this behalf
grant such  relief as  may  be	prescribed.  The  prescribed
relief is  set out  in Rule  21(A) of  the Income-tax Rules.
Both the appellants are entitled to the relief under Sec. 89
because compensation  herein awarded  includes salary  which
was in arrears for 12 years and it is being paid in one lump
sum under  the orders of this Court. Therefore ,  the salary
has to	be spread  over for a period of 12 years as also the
compensation in	 lieu of reinstatement and the relief should
be given  as provided  by Sec. 89 of the Income-tax Act read
with Rule 21(A) of the Income-tax Rules. Both the appellants
are entitled to the same. If any application is necessary to
be made	 ,   the same may be made to the competent authority
and the	 respondent-employer shall  assist the appellants in
each case for obtaining the relief.
     When the  hearing concluded  and we  indicated that  we
were inclined  to award	 compensation for  backwages and  in
lieu of reinstatement ,	 we requested Shri S.R. Srivastava ,
learned counsel for the appellants to give us in a tabulated
form the  compensation to  which  each	appellant  would  be
entitled with  a spread	 over from  the date of the order of
termination of service till the end of the present year. The
tabulations have  been supplied	 in respect  of each  of the
appellants. We have gone through the tabulations and
629
we are	satisfied that	they represent	the correct state of
affairs and  they are  taken on record and are being treated
as part of this judgment.
     Accordingly ,   this  appeal is  partly allowed and the
award giving one year's wages as compensation is modified to
the effect  that each  appellant should be paid Rs. 2,00,000
as and	by way	of  backwages  and  in	lieu  of  relief  of
reinstatement. As  we have  awarded adequate  compensation ,
it is not necessary to award costs. We order accordingly.
A.P.J.				      Appeal partly allowed.
630




