

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Partap Singh vs Union Of India & Oks on 6 September, 1985Equivalent citations: 1985 AIR 1695, 1985 SCR  Supl. (2) 773
Author: E Venkataramiah
Bench: Venkataramiah, E.S. (J)
           PETITIONER:
PARTAP SINGH

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
UNION OF INDIA & OKS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT06/09/1985

BENCH:
VENKATARAMIAH, E.S. (J)
BENCH:
VENKATARAMIAH, E.S. (J)
MISRA, R.B. (J)

CITATION:
 1985 AIR 1695		  1985 SCR  Supl. (2) 773
 1985 SCC  (4) 197	  1985 SCALE  (2)597


ACT:
     Constitution of India, Articles 14 and 15
     Hindu Succession  Act,  1956  s.  14  Compromise  order
Property  allotted   to	 widow	in  lieu  of  her  right  to
maintenance Whether  becomes absolute  estate on  the coming
into force  o the  Act -  Provision contained  in  s.  14(1)
whether vague discriminatory and ultra vires.



HEADNOTE:
     Amar Singh was the owner of certain agricultural lands.
He died leaving behind him two widows by name Jagir Kaur and
Har Kaur  and the  petitioner as  his adopted  son. Under an
arrangement each  of the two widows had been given one Third
share in  the Lands  in Lieu  of their right of maintenance.
Har Kaur  surrendered her  one third  share in favour of the
petitioner and	it was mutated in his favour. The petitioner
filed a	 suit against Jagir Kaur for obtaining a declaration
that she  had no  right, title or interet of any sort in the
lands belonging	 to the	 deceased. A  compromise decree	 was
passed on  July 18, 1945 under which Jagir Kaur could retain
the one	 third hare  in the Lands in question in lieu of her
maintenance and	 on  her  death	 the  petitioner  could	 get
possession of  the same. Later on Jagir Kaur by a will dated
January 25,  1971 bequeathed  the said	one  third  hare  in
favour of  Hardam Singh,  respondent in	 the S.L.P. She died
within a few days thereafter.
     The petitioner  filed another  suit claiming that Jagir
Kaur had acquired one-third share in the Lands of Amar Singh
for  the  first	 time  under  the  compromise  decree  which
conferred on her only a limited estate and that on her death
he should  get possession of the same. The interest of Jagir
Kaur in	 the land  allotted to her for maintenance under the
compromise decree  did not  become an absolute estate in her
hand under  s. 14(1)  of the  Hindu Succession Act 1956. The
Trial Court  dismissing the  suit held that since Jagir Kaur
had a pre-existing right to clam maintenance from the estate
of Amar Singh, her interest in the lands allotted to her had
became enlarged into an absolute estate
774
on the coming into force of the Hindu Succession Act in 1956
and, therefore,	 the petitioner could not claim the lands in
question after her death on the basis of compromise decree.
     Appeals to the District Judge as well as the High Court
also failed.  The petitioner filed Special Leave Petition as
well as	 a Writ	 Petition under	 Article 32  questioning the
constitutional validity	 of s. 14(1) of the Hindu Succession
Act 1956  contending: (1) that the provision contained in 8.
14(1)  was   vague  and	  uncertain  and   in  view  of	 the
observations made  by this  Court in V. Tulasamma &  Ors. v.
V. Sesha  Reddi (dead)	by L.Rs.  1977 (3) S.C.R. 266-27 the
section could not be relied upon any longer, and (2) that it
was violative  of Articles  14 ant 15(1) as it had attempted
to favour  only one  section of the community that was Hindu
women on  the ground  of sex  to the  prejudice of  the male
members of tat community.
      Dismissing the Writ Petition as well as the S.L.P.,
^
      HELD:  1. Section	 14(1) of  the Hindu  Succession Act
1956 is	 not vague  and is  capable of	implementation. This
Court gave  effect to  that provision in Tulasamma's   case.
The observations  were mate  only with a view to bringing to
the notice  of Parliament  that	 the  provisions  of  s.  14
required to  be recast	in order  to  avoid    any  possible
litigation arising  on account	of the	clumsy language used
therein. The  Court, however, did not find any difficulty in
construing and	applying 8.  14 and  in declaring  that	 the
property which	had been  allotted to  the appellant  No.  1
under the  compromise in  lieu or  satisfaction of  right of
maintenance became  her absolute property on the coming into
force of  the Act.  The doubt,	if any, about the meaning of
that section  was set  at rest	by the said decision. In the
instant case,  the position  of Jagir  Kaur was	 in  no	 way
different from the position of Appellant o. 1 in Tulasamma's
case. [778 B-E]
      2.  Section 14(1)	 of the Act was enacted to remedy to
some extent the plight of a Hindu woman who could  no  claim
absolute interest  in the  properties inherited	 by her from
her husband  but who  could only  enjoy them  with  all	 the
restrictions attached  to a  widow's estate  under the Hindu
Law. There is ¯ justification for the males belonging to the
Hindu community	 to raise  any objection  to the beneficient
provisions contained in section 14(1) of the
775
Act on	the grounds of hostile discrimination. The provision
is A further protected by the express provision contained in
clause (3) of Article 15. [778 G-H, 779 A]



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE/ORIGINAL  JURISDICTION :  Special Leave
Petition (Civil) No. 4934 of 1985.
     From the  Judgment and  Order  dated  6.1.1984  of	 the
Punjab & Haryana High Court in R.S.A. No. 1254 of 1975.
     WITH Writ Petition No. 3947 of 1985. C
     (Under Article 32 of the Constitution of India).
     P.C.  Khunger  and	 A.M.  Tripathi	 for  the  appellant
Petitioner.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     VENKATARAMIAH, J.	The above petition for special leave
is  filed  by  the  petitioner	under  Article	136  of	 the
Constitution requesting	 the Court  to grant leave to him to
prefer an  appeal against the judgment and order of the High
Court of  Punjab Haryana  in R.S.A. No. 1254 of 1975. He has
also  filed   a	 writ  petition	 under	Article	 32  of	 the
Constitution questioning  the constitutionality	 of  section
4(1) of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 (hereinafter referred
to as  'the Act').  Since the  two petitions  are connected,
they are disposed of by this common judgment.
     One Amar  Singh was  the owner  of certain agricultural
lands measuring	 in all	 33 Bighas  5 Biswas  in the village
Fatuhi Khera, Tehsil Muktsar in the State of Punjab. He died
in or  about the  year 1932 leaving behind him two widows by
name Jagir  Kaur and ar Kaur. The petitioner was his adopted
son. Under  an arrangement  each of  the two widows had been
given one-third	 share	in  the	 lands	belonging  to  their
husband in  lieu of their right of maintenance. In November,
1942 ar Kaur surrendered her one-third share in the lands in
favour of  the petitioner  and it was mutated in his name on
March 23,  1943. In 1945 the petitioner filed a suit against
Jagir Kaur,  the other	widow of Amar Singh, for obtaining a
declaration that  she had no right, title or interest of any
sort in	 the lands  belonging  to  Amar	 Singh.	 During	 the
pendency of  the said suit a compromise was effected on July
18, 1945  under which  the parties  agreed that	 Jagir	Kaur
could retain
776
the one-third  share in the lands in question in lieu of her
maintenance and	 on her	 death the petitioner should get the
possession of  the same.  Accordingly a	 decree was  passed.
Later on  Jagir Kaur, who was in possession of the said one-
third share  of the  lands, bequeathed	the  said  share  in
favour of  Hardam Singh, the respondent in the Special Leave
Petition, under	 a ill on January 25, 1971 and died within a
few  days  thereafter.	Thereafter  on	April  2,  1971	 the
petitioner filed  the present suit, out of which this appeal
arises, claiming  that Jagir  Kaur  had	 acquired  one-third
share in  the lands  of Amar  Singh for the first time under
the compromise	decree which conferred on her only a limited
estate and that on her death he should get possession of the
same. He  urged that  in the  circumstances, the interest of
Jagir Kaur  in the  lands allotted  to her  for	 maintenance
under the  compromise decree  did  not	become	an  absolute
estate in her hands under section 14(1) of the Act. Since it
could not  be disputed	that Jagir  Kaur had  a pre-existing
right to  claim maintenance  from the  estate of Amar Singh,
the Trial  Court held that the interest of Jagir Kaur in the
lands allotted	to her	had become enlarged into an absolute
estate on the coming into force of the
 Act  and, therefore,  the petitioner  could not  claim	 the
lands in  question after  her death  on	 the  basis  of	 the
compromise decree.  Accordingly,  the  suit  was  dismissed.
Against the  said judgment and decree of the Trial Court the
petitioner filed  an appeal  before the	 Additional District
Judge, Faridkot.  In the  course  of  the  said	 appeal	 the
petitioner conceded  that the  Will was	 a genuine and valid
one, but  it was contended that section 14(1) of the Act was
not applicable	to the	case but  it was governed by section
14(2) of  the Act.  The appeal	was, however, dismissed. The
Second Appeal  filed by the petitioner before the High Court
of Punjab  & Haryana  against the judgment and decree of the
District  Judge	  was  also  dismissed.	 The  Special  Leave
Petition, referred  to above,  is filed against the Judgment
and decree  passed by  the High	 Court. Realising that it is
not possible  for him to succeed in his suit in the presence
of section  141) of  the act,  the petitioner  has filed the
above Writ Petition questioning its constitutional validity.
      Two  contentions are  urged by the learned counsel for
the petitioner	in support of his plea that section 14(1) of
the  Act   is  unconstitutional;   (1)	that  the  provision
contained  in	section	 14(1)	of  the	 Act  is  vague	 and
uncertain; and	(2) that  it is	 violative of Article 14 and
15(1) of the Constitution as it has attempted to favour only
one section of the community, i.e., Hindu omen on the ground
of sex to the prejudice of the male
777
members of  that community.  In support of his first limb of
attack he  relied on the following observations made by this
Court in  V. A	Tulasamma & Ors. v. V. Sesha Reddi (dead) by
L.Rs. [1977] (3) S.C.R., at page 266-27 :
	  "It is  indeed unfortunate  that though  it became
	  evident as  far back as 1967 that sub Sections (1)
	  and (2)  of section  14  were	 presenting  serious
	  difficulties	of   construction  in	cases	were
	  property was received by a Hindu female in lieu of
	  maintenance  and   the  instrument  granting	such
	  property prescribed a restricted estate for her in
	  the property	and divergence	of Judicial  opinion
	  was creating	a  situation  which  might  well  be
	  described as	chaotic, robbing  the  law  of	that
	  modicum of  certainty which it must always possess
	  in  order   to  guide	 the  affairs  of  men,	 the
	  legislature for  all these  years, did not care to
	  step	in  to	remove	the  constructional  dilemma
	  facing the  courts  and  adopted  an	attitude  of
	  indifference and  inaction, untroubled and unmoved
	  by  the  large  number  of  cases  on	 this  point
	  encumbering the  files of  different courts in the
	  country,  when  by  the  simple  expedient  of  an
	  amendment,  it   could  have	 silenced   judicial
	  conflict and	put an	end to	needless litigation.
	  This	is   a	classic	  instance  of	a  statutory
	  provision  which,   by   reason   of	 its   inapt
	  draftsmanship, has  created endless  confusion for
	  litigants and	 proved a  paradise for	 lawyers. It
	  illustrates  forcibly	 the need of an authority or
	  body to  be  set  up	by  the	 Government  or	 the
	  Legislature which  would constantly  keep in touch
	  with the  adjudicatory authorities  in the country
	  as also  with the legal profession and immediately
	  respond by  making  recommendations  for  6uitable
	  amendments whenever  it is found that a particular
	  statutory  provision	 is,  by   reason  of  inapt
	  language  or	 unhappy   draftsmanship,   creating
	  difficulty  of   construction	 or   is   otherwise
	  inadequate or	 defective or  is not well conceived
	  and is  consequently	counter	 productive  of	 the
	  result it  was intended  to achieve. If there is a
	  close inter  action between  the adjudicatory wing
	  of  the   State  and	a  dynamic  and	 ever  alert
	  authority or	body which  responds swiftly  to the
	  draw backs  and deficiencies in the law in action,
	  much of  the time  and money	which is  at present
	  expanded in fruitless litigation, would H
778
	  he   saved and  law would achieve a certain amount
	  of clarity,  certainty and  simplicity which alone
	  can make it easily intelligible to the people."
      It  is  contended	 by  the  learned  counsel  for	 the
petitioner quite  ingeniously that  since Parliament had not
amended section 14 after the above judgment of this Court as
indicated by  the Court,  the said  section could not relied
upon any loner.
     We do  not find  any substance  in the  contention that
section 14(1)  of the  Act is  vague and  is not  capable of
implementation because	this Court  gave effect of that sub-
section in  the very judgment on which the petitioner relies
notwithstanding	 the  observations  extracted  above.  Those
observations were  made by  this Court	only with  a view to
bringing to  the notice of Parliament that the provisions of
section 14  required to	 be recast  in order  to  avoid	 any
possible  litigation   arising	on  account  of	 the  clumsy
language used in section 14 of the Act. The Court, how ever,
did not	 find any  difficulty  in  construing  and  applying
section 14(1)  of the Act to the case of the appellant No. 1
in that	 case and  in declaring	 that the property which had
been  allotted	 to  her   under  compromise   in  lieu	  or
satisfaction of	 right of  maintenance became  her  absolute
property on  the coming into force of the Act. The doubt, if
any, about  the meaning	 of that  section was set at rest by
the above  decision. In	 the instant  case the	position  of
Jagir Kaur  was in no way different from the position of the
appellant No.  1 in  Tulasamma's  case	(supra).  The  first
ground, therefore should fail.
     There is very little substance in the second contention
raised by the petitioner also. The submission made on behalf
of  the	 petitioner  in	 this  case  over-looks	 the  benign
constitutional provision  in clause (3) of Article 15 of the
Constitution which provides that nothing in Article 15 shall
prevent the  State from	 making any  special  provision	 for
women and children. The said provision over-rides clause (1)
of Article  15 of  the Constitution  which provides that the
State shall  not discriminate against any citizen on grounds
only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of
them. Section 14(1) of the Act was enacted to remedy to some
extent the  plight of  a Hindu	woman who  could  not  claim
absolute interest  in the  properties inherited	 by her from
her husband  but who  could only  enjoy then.  with all	 the
restrictions attached  to a  widow's estate  under the Hindu
law. There  is now  hardly any	justification for  the males
belonging to  the Hindu	 community to raise any objection to
the beneficent
779
provisions contained  in section  14(1) of  the Act  on	 the
ground of  hostile discrimination.  The above  provision  is
further protected  by the  express  provision  contained  in
clause (3)  of Article	15, since  it is a special provision
enacted for  the benefit  of Hindu women. We do not find any
merit in  the Writ Petition. The Writ Petition is dismissed.
Consequently, the  Special Leave  Petition also	 has  to  be
dismissed. It is accordingly dismissed.
A.P.J.					Petitions dismissed.
780




