

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Dhanjibhai Ramjibhai vs State Of Gujarat on 22 January, 1985Equivalent citations: 1985 AIR  603, 1985 SCR  (2) 632
Author: R Pathak
Bench: Pathak, R.S.
           PETITIONER:
DHANJIBHAI RAMJIBHAI

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF GUJARAT

DATE OF JUDGMENT22/01/1985

BENCH:
PATHAK, R.S.
BENCH:
PATHAK, R.S.
VENKATARAMIAH, E.S. (J)
ERADI, V. BALAKRISHNA (J)

CITATION:
 1985 AIR  603		  1985 SCR  (2) 632
 1985 SCC  (2)	 5	  1985 SCALE  (1)65
 CITATOR INFO :
 F	    1989 SC1247	 (5)


ACT:
     Service law- Termination simpliciter of the services of
a probationer  without confirming  him after allowing him to
continue after	the initial  period of	Probation - Right to
confirmation-The termination  cannot be	 set to	 be as	mala
fide or	 in violation of provisions of Clause (2) of Article
311 of the Constitution of India Article 136-Interference by
the Supreme Court.



HEADNOTE:
     The services  of the appellent who was appointed to the
post of	 Sales Tax Officer, by an order dated March 22, 1972
on probation  for a  period  of	 two  years,  but  continued
thereafter in  service without	any order  confirming him in
his appointment	 were terminated on March 31, 1975. The writ
petition filed in the
     High Court	 of Gujarat, challenging the said terminated
was dismissed,	by a  judgment dated April 21, 1976. Finding
no basis  for the allegation of mala fide on facts the court
held that  there was  no right to confirmation on the expiry
of the	period of  probation, and  therefore, there  was  no
violation of the provisions of Clause (2) Article 311 of the
Constitution. An appeal filed by the appellant was dismissed
by the	Division Bench, on March 28, 1977. Hence the appeal,
by special leave of the Court.
     Dismissing the appeal, the Court,
^
      HELD  1.1. The  allegation of  mala  fides  is  wholly
baseless and  has not  been established.  Where a finding of
fact has been rendered by a learned Single Judge of the High
Court as  a Court  of first instance and thereafter affirmed
in appeal  by an  Appellate Bench  of that  High Court,	 the
Supreme Court  should be  reluctant to	interfere  with	 the
finding unless there is very strong reason to do so.
						    [635C-D1
      2.1  When the  order of  appointment recited  that the
appellant would	 be on	probation for a period of two years,
it conformed  to Rule  5  of  the  Recruitment	Rules  which
prescribes such	 period of  probation. Under  the  Rule	 the
period of  probation may  be extended in accordance with the
rules. The  period of  two years  specified in	the Rule  is
merely the  initial period  for	 which	an  officer  may  be
appointed on  probation and  does not  represent the maximum
period of  probation In terms of the said rule the period of
probation may be extended. [635E-F]
633
      2.2  The power  to extend the period of probation must
not be confused A with the manner in which the extension may
be effected.  The one  relates to  power, the  other to mere
procedure. Merely  because procedural  rules have  not	been
framed does  Dot imply	a negation  of	the  power.  In	 the
absence of  any rule indicating the manner for extending the
period of  probation, it  is sufficient	 that the  power  is
exercised  fairly  and	reasonably,  having  regard  to	 the
context in which the power has been granted. [635G-H] B
      3.1 There is no question of any legitimate expectation
of being  confirmed or	even right  to confirmation  on	 the
expiry	of  two	 years	of  probation  and  on	successfully
completing the	qualifying tests and training undergone by a
Government employee.  It was open to the State Government to
consider the  entire  record  of  service  rendered  by	 its
employee and  to  determine  whether  he  was  suitable	 for
confirmation or	 his  services	should	be  terminated.	 The
function of confirmation implies the exercise of judgment of
the confirming	authority on  the overall suitability of the
employee for permanent absorption in service. [636A-B]
      3.2 The contention that the appellant should have been
heard before  his services  were terminated  is not  correct
since the  order of  termination does not contain any stigma
or refer  to any  charge Or  misconduct on  the part  of the
appellant and the termination was on the basis of an overall
appreciation of his record of service disentitling him to be
absorbed in the service. (636D; F)
      3.3.  No distinction  lies between a probationer whose
services are  terminated on  the expiry	 of two	 years and a
probationer who	 has completed	the normal span of two years
and whose  services are	 terminated some time later after he
has put	 in a  further period  of service.  It is  perfectly
possible that  during the  initial period  of probation	 the
confirming authority  may be  unable  to  reach	 a  definite
conclusion on  whether the  candidate should be confirmed or
his services  should be	 terminated. Such  candidate may  be
allowed to  continue beyond  the initial period of two years
in order  to allow  the confirming  authority to arrive at a
definite opinion.  A candidate	does not  enjoy any  greater
right to  confirmation if  he is  allowed to continue beyond
the initial period of probation. [636G-H; 637A-B]



JUDGMENT:
      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 2480 of
1977
      From  the Judgment  and Order  dated  28.3.77  of	 the
Gujarat High Court in L.P.A. No. 232 of 1976.
      R.N. Karanjawala 2nd P.H Parekh for the appellant.
      M.N.  Phadke, S.C.  Patel	 and  R.N.  Poddar  for	 the
respondents.
      The Judgement of the Court was delivered by
      PATHAK,  J. This appeal by special leave arises out of
a writ	petition filed	by the appellant in the Gujarat High
Court challenging an order terminating his services.
634
	    The appellant was appointed to the post of Sales
Tax Officer  by an  order dated	 March 22,  1972. The  order
recited that  the appointment  was on probation for a period
of two	years. The  period of  two years  expired,  and	 the
appellant  continued  in  service  and	no  order  was	made
confirming  his	  appointment.	On   March  31,	  1975	 the
appellant's services were terminated.
      Aggrieved	 by the	 termination of	 his  services,	 the
appellant filed	 a  writ  petition  in	the  High  Court  of
Gujarat, but  by his judgment and order dated April 21, 1976
a learned  Single Judge	 dismissed  the	 writ  petition.  An
appeal was  filed by  the appellant, and an  Appellate Bench
of the	High Court dismissed the appeal by its judgement and
order dated March 28. 1977
      Three  points have  been	raised	before	us  in	this
appeal. The  first contention  is that the order terminating
the appellant's	 services   was passed mala fide, the second
is that	 on the	 expiry	 of  the  period  of  probation	 the
appellant  must	 be  deemed  to	 have  been  confirmed,	 and
inasmuch  as  his  services  have  been	 terminated  without
complying with	clause (2)  of	Article	 311  the  order  is
invalid. The  last contention  is  that	 the  principles  of
natural justice	 were violated	inasmuch as  on the facts of
the present  case the  appellant. even as a probationer, was
entitled to be heard before his services were terminated.
      On  the first  contention, the learned Single Judge as
well as	 the Appellate	Bench examined	the material  on the
record and  came concurrently  to the  conclusion  that	 the
allegation of  mala fide  was  without	foundation.  Learned
counsel for  the appellant  has taken  us through the record
and has endeavored to show that the appellant had discharged
his duties  ably and with integrity, and there was no reason
for terminating	 his services.	Various particulars were set
forth in  the special  leave petition filed in this Court in
support	 of   that   assertion.	  Now,	 it   appears	that
substantially the  same allegations  were set  forth by	 the
appellant in  his writ	petition, but in the affidavit filed
in reply  by the  State Government  those  allegations	were
denied.	 On   the  contrary,   it  was	 asserted  that	 the
appellant's services were terminated entirely because of his
unsatisfactory record and that the order was not vitiated by
any illegality or unfairness. In support of the plea of mala
fides, the  appellant alleged  that his	 services  had	been
terminated because  he	had  taken  proceedings	 against  an
assessee, Messrs.  Shriraj &  Company who,  according to the
appellant, enjoyed  political favour  and influence with the
authorities. The allegation
635
has been denied in the counter-affidavit. During the hearing
of the	special leave petition this Court directed the State
Government to  file a  specific affidavit  relating  to	 the
facts alleged  in the writ petition regarding a confidential
enquiry initiated  by the Government. The affidavit filed in
reply admits  that an  enquiry	was  initiated	against	 the
appellant on  the complaint  of the  said assessee,  but  it
maintains that	there was  no mala  fides on the part of the
Ministers  concerned  and  that	 a  persual  of	 the  record
relating to  that enquiry  shows that the allegation of mala
fides is  wholly baseless.  We have  considered	 the  matter
carefully and  we find	no sufficient  reason to differ from
the finding  of the  High Court	 that the allegation of mala
fides is  not established.  We think it desirable to observe
that where  a finding of fact has been rendered by a learned
Single Judge  of the High Court as a Court of first instance
and thereafter	affirmed in  appeal by an Appellate Bench of
that High Court, this Court should be reluctant to interfere
with the  finding unless  there is  very strong reason to do
so.
      The  second contention  on behalf	 of the appellant is
that the  appellant must  be deemed  to have  been confirmed
inasmuch as he was allowed to continue in service even after
the expiry of the period of probation of two years specified
in the order of appointment. We are of opinion that when the
order of appointment recited that the petitioner would be on
probation for  a period of two years, it conformed to Rule 5
of the	Recruitment Rules  which prescribes  such period  of
probation. The	Rule  states  further  that  the  period  of
probation may  be extended in accordance with the rules. The
period of  two years  specified in  the Rule  is merely	 the
initial period	for which  an officer  may be  appointed  on
probation. As  the terms  of the  same	Rule  indicate,	 the
period of  probation may  be extended.	 The  period of	 two
years does not represent the maximum period of probation.
      It  is next  urged that  as no  rules have been framed
indicating the manner for extending the period of probation,
there is  no power  to extend  the period  of probation. The
argument suffers  from a  fallacy. The	power to  extend the
period of  probation must not be confused with the manner in
which the  extension may  be affected.	The one	 relates  to
power,	the   other  to	  mere	procedure.   Merely  because
procedural rules  have not  been framed	 does  not  imply  a
negation of  the power.	 In the absence of such rules, it is
sufficient  that   the	power	is  exercised	fairly	 and
reasonably, having  regard to the context in which the power
have been granted.
636
      It  is then  submitted that  the appellant  enjoyed  a
legitimate expectation	of being  confirmed on the expiry of
two years  of probation	 and on	 successfully completing the
qualifying tests  and training	undergone by him. We are not
impressed by  that contention.	It was	open  to  the  State
Government  to	consider  the  entire  record  of    service
rendered by  the appellant  and to  determine whether he was
suitable  for	confirmation  or   his	services  should  be
terminated. There  was no  right  in  the  appellant  to  be
confirmed merely  because he  had completed  the  period  of
probation of  two years	 and had  passed the requisite tests
and completed  the  prescribed	training.  The	function  of
confirmation  implies	the  exercise  of  judgment  by	 the
confirming authority  on  the  overall	suitability  of	 the
employee for permanent absorption in service.
      The second contention must also be rejected.
	    The last contention is that the appellant should
have been   heard  before his  services were terminated. The
order of termination does not contain any stigma or refer to
any charge of misconduct on the part of the appellant. It is
said that  the State  Government terminated  the appellant's
services because  a complaint  had been	 made against him by
Messrs. Shriraj & Company, whose case had been dealt with by
him, and  that the  appellants should  have been    given  a
hearing to  show that  there was no basis for the complaint.
There would  have been	substance in  this contention if the
appellant's services  had been	terminated on  the ground of
misconduct committed  in connection with the case of Messrs.
Shriraj &  Company. On	the contrary,  it appears  from	 the
record	before	 us  that   the	 appellant's  services	were
terminated because  on an overall appreciation of his record
of service he was found unsuitable for being absorbed in the
service.
       A  distinction  is  sought  to  be  drawn  between  a
probationer whose  services are	 terminated on the expiry of
the period of two years and a probationer, who has completed
the  normal  span  of  two  years  and	whose  services	 are
terminated some	 time later  after he  has put	in a further
period of  service. We are unable to see any distinction. It
is perfectly  possible that  during the	 initial  period  of
probation the  confirming authority may be unable to reach a
definite conclusion on whether the candidate should be
637
confirmed  or	his  services  should  be  terminated.	Such
candidate may  A be  allowed to	 continue beyond the initial
period of  two	years  in  order  to  allow  the  confirming
authority to  arrive at	 a definite  opinion. It seems to us
difficult to  hold that a candidate enjoys any greater right
to confirmation	 if he	is allowed  to continue	 beyond	 the
period of probation. B
      In  our judgment there is no force in this appeal, and
it is  dismissed but  in the circumstances without any order
as to costs.
S.R.					   Appeal dismissed.
638




