

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Bihar State Harijan Kalyan ... vs Union Of India & Ors on 1 March, 1985Equivalent citations: 1985 AIR  983, 1985 SCR  (3)	 12
Author: O C Reddy
Bench: Reddy, O. Chinnappa (J)
           PETITIONER:
BIHAR STATE HARIJAN KALYAN PARISHAD

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
UNION OF INDIA & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT01/03/1985

BENCH:
REDDY, O. CHINNAPPA (J)
BENCH:
REDDY, O. CHINNAPPA (J)
VENKATARAMIAH, E.S. (J)

CITATION:
 1985 AIR  983		  1985 SCR  (3)	 12
 1985 SCC  (2) 644	  1985 SCALE  (1)369
 CITATOR INFO :
 RF	    1991 SC1173	 (5)


ACT:
     Constitution of India 1950, Article 16
     Reservation of posts for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes-Group 'A'  services-Promotion  by  selection  method-
Presidential Directive	para 9	- Public Sector Undertaking-
Government communications  denying benefit  of	reservation-
Quashed



HEADNOTE:
	 In case  of promotion	to posts  promotion to which
are by	the selection  method, 15% and 7.5 per cent of posts
were to	 be reserved  for  Scheduled  Castes  and  Scheduled
Tribes respectively.  Para 9  of the  Presidential Directive
provided that  the aforesaid  rule of  reservation was	also
applicable to  promotions by selection to posts within Group
A' carrying  a salary  of Rs.  2250 per	 month or  less, and
prescribed that	 officers belonging  to the Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled  Tribes would be considered for promotion, who
are senior  enough to  be within  the zone of consideration,
and described the procedure to be adopted.
     By a  letter dated the 8th April, 1982, the Ministry of
Steel and Mines, Department of Steel, informed the Chairman,
Steel Authority	 of India  Limited, that  in accordance with
para  9	  of  the   Presidential  Directive   there  was  no
reservation for	 Scheduled Castes  and Scheduled  Tribes  in
promotion by selection to posts within Group A'. This letter
in turn	 was followed up by a communication dated August 19,
1982 by	 the Steel Authority of India to the Chief Personnel
Manager, Bokaro	 Steel Plant stating that no reservation for
scheduled caste	 / scheduled  tribe candidates in matters of
promotions to  any grade  within Group-A  posts	 are  to  be
provided, since	 promotions  within  Group-A  posts  in	 the
company are based on selection method.
     The writ  petition of  the Appellant,  complaining that
the letter  dated April	 8, 1982  of the Ministry of Steel &
Mines and the letter dated August
13
19, 1982  to the  Chief Personnel  Manager of  Bokaro  Steel
Plant	purported  to  deny  to	 the  scheduled	 castes	 and
scheduled tribes the benefit of reservation in the matter of
promotion to selection posts within Group 'A', was summarily
dismissed by the High Court.
      Allowing the Appeal to this Court,
^
	 HELD: 1.  Para 9  of  the  Presidential  Directive,
which deals  with  "concession	to  employees  of  Scheduled
Castes and  Scheduled  Tribes  in  promotions  by  selection
method" makes  abundantly clear that the rule of reservation
is also	 applicable to	promotions  by	selection  to  posts
within Group 'A' which carry an ultimate salary of Rs. 2,250
per month or   less.  It  however,  prescribes	a  procedure
different from	the usual  procedure adopted  in filling  up
posts reserved	for Scheduled  Castes and  Scheduled Tribes.
[16F-G]
     2. The  letters of	 the Department	 of Steel  dated 8th
April, 1982, and of the Steel Authority of India Ltd., dated
August 19,  1982 are  contrary to para 9 of the Presidential
Directive. [17A]
     3. The  writ petition  is allowed.	 The  letters  dated
April  8,   1982  and  August  19,  1982  are  quashed.	 The
respondents are	 directed to  give effect  to paragraph 9 of
the Presidential Directive. [17A]



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION : Civil Appeal No. 680 of
1985.
     From the  Judgment and order dated 1.2.1983 of the High
Court of Patna at Ranchi in C.W.J.C. No. 1152/82.
     V.M. Tarkunde,  P.H.Parekh and  Miss Lata Krishnamurthi
for the petitioners.
     V.A. Syed	Mohammad,  Abdul  Khader,  K.J.	 John,	S.R.
Grover, Manjul	Bajpayee, Goverdhan,  C.V. Subba  Rao,	R.N.
Poddar, and Miss A Subhashini for the Respondents
     The judgment of the Court was delivered by
      CHINNAPPA REDDY, J. Special leave granted.
     The Bihar	State Harijan  Kalyan  Parishad	 whose	writ
petition against  the Steel  Authority of  India  Ltd.,	 the
Union of  India and  others, was  dismissed in limine is the
appellant  before   us	in   this  appeal.  We	are  afraid,
notwithstanding the summary dismissal;
14
of the	writ Petition  by the High Court, this appeal has to
be allowed  The appellant  is rightly  aggrieved with letter
No. 18.(12)/81-SAIL-II/	 Coord dated  April 8, 1982 from the
Ministry    of	Steel and Mines addressed to the Chairman of
the Steel   Authority	  of India  Limited and	 letter	 No.
PER/IR/7949 (pt)  dated	 August	 19,  1982  from  the  Steel
Authority of  India Limited  to the Chief Personnel Manager,
Bokaro Steel  Plant, Bokaro.  The effect of the two letters,
which we will extract in full later at an appropriate stage,
is to  deny to the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes the
benefit	 of  reservation  in  the  matter  of  promotion  to
selection posts within Group 'A'. The Bokaro Steel Plant, we
may mention  here, is a unit of the Steel Authority of India
Limited which  in turn	is a public limited Company entirely
owned, controlled  and supervised by the Central Government.
It is not disputed that the Steel Authority of India Limited
is an  instrumentality of  the State  and  is  an  authority
within the meaning of Art. 12 of the Constitution of India.
     The Government  of India, Ministry of Finance Bureau of
Public	Enterprises,   issued  a   directive  to  the  Chief
Executives of  all Public  Sector Enterprises on the subject
of reservation	for scheduled castes and scheduled tribes in
appointments in	 public enterprises.  While 15%; and 7.5 per
cent of	 posts are  generally to  be reserved  for Scheduled
Castes and  Scheduled Tribes  respectively, in	the case  of
promotion of  members of  the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes to  posts promotion  to which  are by  the  selection
method, a  special procedure  is devised  by Para  9 of	 the
directive. In the case of promotions within Group 'A', it is
laid down:
	       "In promotions  by selection  to posts within
	 Group 'A  which carry	an ultimate salary of Rs. 2,
	 250   per    month,   or    less,   the   scheduled
	 caste/scheduled  tribe	  officers  who	 are  senior
	 enough in  the zone  of consideration for promotion
	 so as	to be  within the  number of  vacancies	 for
	 which the  select list has to be drawn up, would be
	 included  in	that  list  provided  they  are	 not
	 considered unfit  for promotion.  Their position in
	 the select  list would,  however, be  The  same  as
	 assigned to  them  by	the  Departmental  Promotion
	 Committee on  the basis of their record of service.
	 They would  not be  given,  for  this	purpose	 one
	 grading   higher   than   the	 grading   otherwise
	 assignable to	them on the basis of their record of
	 service,"
15
     A close  perusal of  the directive	 and  in  particular
paragraph 9  which deals  with "concessions  to employees of
Scheduled Castes  and  Scheduled  Tribes  in  promotions  by
selection method''  makes it  abundantly clear that the rule
of reservation is also applicable to promotions by selection
to posts  within Group	A' which carry an ultimate salary of
Rs. 2,	250 per	 month or  less, but  that the	procedure is
slightly different  than in  the case  of other posts. While
the rule  of reservation  applies to promotions by selection
to posts within Group 'A' carrying a salary of Rs. 2,250 per
month or  less, it  is prescribed  that only  those officers
belonging to  the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes will
be considered  for promotion  who are  senior enough  to  be
within the  zone of  consideration. Thereafter a Select List
depending upon	the number of vacancies would be drawn up in
which would also be included those officers belonging to the
Scheduled Castes and scheduled Tribes who are not considered
unfit for promotion. Their position in the Select List would
be that	 assigned to  them  by	the  Departmental  Promotion
Committee on  the basis	 of the	 record of service. In other
words, their  inclusion in  the Select	List would  not give
them seniority,	 merely by  virtue of their belonging to the
scheduled castes  and scheduled	 tribes over  other officers
placed above  them in  the Select  List by  the Departmental
Promotion Committee.  This appears  to us  to  be  the	only
possible interpretation of paragraph 9 of the
directive. However,  by letter	No. 18(12)/81-SAlL  II/Coord
dated the  8th April,  1982 from  the Ministry	of Steel and
Mines, Department of Steel, addressed to the Chairman of the
Steel  Authority   of  India  Limited,	the  above-mentioned
paragraph 9  of the  directive appears	to have been totally
misinterpreted. The letter runs as follows:
      "Sir,
     I am  directed to	refer to your letter No. PER/IR/1914
(pt) dated  the 12th November, 1981 on the above subject and
to say	that in	 accordance with  para 9 of the Presidential
Directive on  the subject there is no reservation for S/C ST
in promotion  by selection  to posts  within Group 'A' which
carry an ultimate salary of Rs 2250 per month or less.
					    Your faithfully,
							 Sd/
						(T.V. NAYER)
		     Deputy Secretary to the Govt. Of India"
16
      This  letter in  turn was	 followed by a communication
dated August  19, 1982	from the Steel Authority of India to
the Chief  Personnel Manager  of Bokaro	 Steel Plant  to the
following effect: "
     Dear Sir,
	  Kindly refer	to  your  letter  No.  BCL-PER	(OP)
     5/57//3251 dated 19th July, 1982, on the above subject.
	  2. No	 reservation for  scheduled  caste/scheduled
     tribe candidates  in matters of promotions to any grade
     within  Group-A   posts  are   to	be  provided,  since
     promotions within	Group-A posts  in  the	company	 are
     based on  selection method.  The principle of seniority
     subject to	 fitness does  not apply  in the case of our
     promotion policy  since the  employees have first to be
     found suitable for promotion through selection process,
     and  only	 thereafter,  at  certain  levels,  are	 the
     promotions made  in  the  order  of  seniority  of	 the
     selected.
					   Yours faithfully.
							 Sd/
						(P.N. Singh)
				       Deputy Director (IR)"
     It is at once seen that the two letters are contrary to
para graph  9 of  the Presidential  Directive on  which they
purport to  place reliance.  Paragraph 9 of the Presidential
Directive no  where says  that the  rule of reservation does
not apply  to promotion	 by selection  to posts within Group
which carry  an ultimate  salary of  Rs. 225)  per month  or
less. On  the other  hand paragraph  9 of  the	Presidential
Directive proceeds  on the basic assumption that the rule of
reservation does apply but prescribes a certain procedure to
be followed,  a procedure different from the usual procedure
adopted in  filling up	posts reserved	for Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled  Tribes. It  is indeed a matter of surprise to
us that	 the Ministry of Steel and Mines has chosen to place
such an	 interpretation on  paragraph 9	 of the Presidential
Directive. The stand taken by them in the letter dated April
8,  1984  is  reiterated  in  paragraph	 5  of	the  counter
affidavit  filed  on  behalf  of  the  Union  of  India.  No
explanation has been given in the counter affidavit for what
appears to  us to  be a plain volte face. We have no option,
but to quash the
17
letters dated  April 8,	 1982  and  August  19,	 1982  above
extracted by us and to direct the respondents to give effect
to paragraph  9 of  the Presidential  Directive with  effect
from the  date	of  the	 Directive.  We	 have  set  out	 our
interpretation of the Presidential Directive and effect will
be  given  to  the  Presidential  Directive  in	 the  manner
interpreted by	us. We	also wish  to make it clear that the
classification of  posts  will	be  on	the  same  lines  as
mentioned in  paragraph 2 of the Presidential Directive. The
writ petition is allowed with costs.
N.V.K.					   Petition allowed.
18




