

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Shanker Dass vs Union Of India & Anr on 12 March, 1985Equivalent citations: 1985 AIR  772, 1985 SCR  (3) 163
Author: Y Chandrachud
Bench: Chandrachud, Y.V. ((Cj)
           PETITIONER:
SHANKER DASS

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
UNION OF INDIA & ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT12/03/1985

BENCH:
CHANDRACHUD, Y.V. ((CJ)
BENCH:
CHANDRACHUD, Y.V. ((CJ)
DESAI, D.A.
SEN, AMARENDRA NATH (J)

CITATION:
 1985 AIR  772		  1985 SCR  (3) 163
 1985 SCC  (2) 358	  1985 SCALE  (1)391
 CITATOR INFO :
 R	    1985 SC1416	 (127)
 RF	    1989 SC1185	 (29)


ACT:
       Constitution  of India  1950,  Article  311  (2)	 and
Probation of  Offenders	 Act  1958,  Sections  3,4  and	 12-
Employee-Prosecuted  and  convicted  for  breach  of  trust-
Released under the Probation of Offenders Act-Dismissed from
service summarily consequent upon conviction-Dismissal order
whether	 permissible   and  valid-Right	 to  impose  penalty
carries with it a duty to act justly.
     Words & Phrase:
      'disqualification'- Meaning of sectioa 12 Probation of
Offenders Act, 1958 .



HEADNOTE:
       The  appellant was  employed as	a Cash	Clerk  in  a
Department  under   the	 administrative	  control   of	 the
Government of  India. He  was prosecuted for breach of trust
in respect  of a  sum of  Rs. 500.  He repaid the amount and
pleaded guilty	to the	charge. The Magistrate accepting the
plea convicted	the appellant  under i	section 409  of	 the
Indian	Penal  Code,  but  having  regard  to  the  peculiar
circumstances  relating	  to  the   crime  and	the  adverse
circumstances in  which the  appellant was  placed, when  he
committed the  offence, viz. his son died during the period,
his wife  fell down  from an  upper storey and was seriously
injured, his  daughter fell  ill and that illness lasted for
about eight  months; released  him under  section 4  of	 the
Probation of  Offenders	 Act,  1958  As	 a  result  of	this
conviction, the	 appellant was	dismissed from	service sum-
marily,
       The  appellant filled  a suit  for setting  aside his
dismissal  from	  service,  contending	that  since  he	 was
released under	the Probation  of Offenders Act 1958, it was
not permissible for the authorities to impose the penalty of
dismissal from service. The suit was dismissed on the ground
that since  the appellant was convicted of a criminal charge
he was liable to be dismissed under clause (a) of the second
proviso to Article 311(2) of the Constitution.
       The  appellant's first  appeal was dismissed, but the
second appeal  to the  High Court  was allowed	by a  Single
Judge  OD  the	ground	that  by  virtue  of  the  provision
contained in  section 12  of the  Probation of Offenders Act
1958, the
164
appellant  could  not  be  dismissed  from  service  without
affording him  a reasonable  opportunity of  being heard, as
required by Article 311 (2) of the Constitution. The Letters
Patent Appeal  I of  the Government  of	 India	against	 the
judgment was allowed by a Division Bench.
     Allowing the appellant's appeal to this Court,
^
     HELD: 1. The judgment of the Division Bench of the High
Court in  the Letters Patent is set aside, and the appellant
shall be  reinstated in	 service forthwith,  with full	back
wages from the date of dismissal until reinstatement. 1168El
       2. Section 12 of the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958
provides that  notwithstanding	anything  contained  in	 any
other law,  a person  found guilty  of an  offence and dealt
with under  the provisions of section 3 or 4 thereof, "shall
not suffer  disqualification ' attaching to a conviction for
an offence  under such	law. The  order	 of  dismissal	from
service	  consequent	upon   a   conviction	is   not   a
"disqualification" within  the meaning	of section 12. There
are statutes  which provide  that persons  who are convicted
for certain  offences shall incur certain disqualifications.
For example, Chapter Ill of the Representation of the People
Act, 1951,  entitled "Disqualifications	 for  membership  of
Parliament   and State Legislatures" and Chapter IV entitled
"Disqualifications for	Voting''  contain  provisions  which
disqualify persons  convicted of  certain charges from being
members	 of   legislatures  or	 from	being	members	  of
legislatures or	 from voting at elections legislatures. That
is the sense in which the word disqualification-' is used in
section 12 of the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958. [166F-H]
       In  the instant case, it is therefore not possible to
accept the  reasoning of  the Single  Judge  in	 the  Second
Appeal.
     3. Clause (a) of the second proviso to Article 31 l (2)
of the	Constitution confers  on the Government the power to
dismiss a  person from	service "on  the ground	 of  conduct
which has  led to his conviction on a criminal charge". But,
that power,  like every	 other power  has  to  be  exercised
fairly, justly	and reasonably.	 The Constitution  dose	 not
contemplate that  a Government	servant who is convicted for
parking his scooter in a no-parking area should be dismissed
from service.  He may,	perhaps not be entitle(l to be heard
on the	question of  penalty since  clause(a) of  the second
proviso to  Article 311(2)  makes the  provisions  of  that.
Article inapplicable  when a  penalty is  to be imposed on a
Government servant on the ground of conduct which has led to
his conviction on a criminal charge. But the right to impose
a penalty carries with it the duty to act justly. [168B-C]
       In  the instant case, the Government chose to dismiss
the appellant  in a  huff without  applying its	 mind to the
penalty which  could appropriately be imposed upon him in so
far as	his service  career was	 concerned. Considering	 the
facts of  the case,  there can	be no  two opinions that the
penalty	 of   dismissal	   from	 service  imposed  upon	 the
appellant is whimsical. [167H; 168D]
165



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Civil  Appeal No.  . 480
of1973 A
     On appeal	by Certificate	from the Judgment and Decree
dated 10.10.1972  of the  High Court  of  Delhi	 in  Letters
Patent Appeal No. 380/71.
     Mrs. Indra Sawhney for the Appellant.
     V.C. Mahajan,  G.D. Gupta,	 C.V.  Subba  Rao  and	R.N.
Poddar for the Respondents.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     CHANDRACHUD,  C.J.	 Cases	which  evoke  sympathy	come
frequently before the Courts. But, pity, not often. The case
before us  has a  unique story to tell, the story of a crime
committed under the stress of personal misery, compounded by
the apathy  of the Establishment and the appalling delays of
law. Ironically,  the silver  lining  is  furnished  by	 the
bravery of  a broken  man  who	has  been  fighting  against
injustice for the last 23 years. When justice is done, or so
the judges  believe, the conscience is assuaged. But in this
case, despite  our doing  all  that  can  be  done  for	 the
appellant within  the framework	 of law,  we have  an uneasy
conscience. Delay  not only  defeats justice  and robs it of
its immediate  relevance to  the parties  but it  shakes the
very confidence	 of the	 people in the desire and ability of
law courts  to assist  them when  they need  that assistance
most.
     The  appellant   was  retrenched  by  the	Ministry  of
Rehabilitation, Government  of India  in 1960,	whereupon he
was employed as a Cash Clerk by the Delhi Milk Supply Scheme
Department, which is under the administrative control of the
Government of  India. In  1962, he was prosecuted for breach
of trust  in respect  of a  sum of  Rs. 500.  He repaid that
amount and  pleaded quality  to the  charge. Accepting	that
plea, the  learned Magistrate, First Class, Delhi, convicted
him under  section 409 of the Penal Code but, in view of the
peculiar  circumstances	  relating  to	the  crime  and	 the
criminal, he released him under section 4 of the
166
Probation of  Offenders	 Act,  1958.  As  a  result  of	 the
conviction,  the   appellant  was   dismissed  from  service
summarily, with effect from April, 14, 1964.
     The appellant  filed a suit in 1966 in the court of the
Sub  Judge,   First  Class,  Delhi  for	 setting  aside	 his
dismissal from	service, mainly	 on the ground that since he
was released  under the	 Probation of  Offenders Act, it was
not permissible	 to the	 authorities to	 visit him  with the
penalty of  dismissal from  service. That suit was dismissed
on the	ground that  since the	appellant was convicted of a
criminal charge,  he was liable to be dismissed under clause
(a) of	the  second  proviso  to  Article  311	(2)  of	 the
Constitution. The  deree of the trial court was confirmed by
the learned  Additional Senior	Sub-Judge, Delhi  in January
1968. The  appellant filed  Second Appeal No. 142 of 1968 in
the High Court of Delhi, which was allowed by D.K. Kapur, J.
On  April,   13,  1971.	  The  learned	Judge  accepted	 the
contention of  the appellant  that, by	reason of  provision
contained in  section 12  of the Probation of Offenders Act,
he could not be dismissed from service without affording him
a reasonable  opportunity of  being heard,  as	required  by
Article 311 (2) of the Constitution. The Government of India
filed a	 Letters Patent	 appeal against that judgment, which
was allowed  by Jagjit	Singh  and  R.N.  Aggarwal,  JJ.  On
October 10,  1972. This	 appeal of the year 1973 has come up
for hearing  in this  Court more  than 11 years after it was
filed.
 Section 12	 of the	 Probation of  Offenders Act must be
placed out  of way  first. It provides that not withstanding
any thing  contained in any other law, a person found guilty
of an offence and dealt with under the provisions of section
3 or  4 "shall	not suffer  disqualification" attaching to a
conviction for	an offence  under such	law.  The  order  of
dismissal from service consequent upon a conviction is not a
disqualification" within  the meaning  of section  12. There
are statutes  which provide  that persons  who are convicted
for certain  offences shall incur certain disqualifications.
For example, Chapter III of the Representation of the People
Act, 1951,  entitled "Disqualifications	 for  membership  of
Parliament and	State Legislatures"  and Chapter IV entitled
"Disqualifications  for	  Voting  contain  provisions  which
disqualify persons  convicted of  certain charges from being
members of  legislatures or  from  voting  at  elections  to
legislatures.  That   is  the	sense  in   which  the	word
"disqualifica-
167
tion" is  used in  section 12  of the Probation of Offenders
Act. There-fore,  it is not possible to accept the reasoning
of the learned Single Judge of the Delhi High Court.
     But though	 this is so the ultimate order passed by the
learned single	Judge has  to be upheld. It can be supported
on grounds other than the one on which it rests.
     The learned  Magistrate First  Class, Delhi,  Shri Amba
Prakash was  gifted with more than ordinary understanding of
law. Indeed  he set  an example	 worthy of emulation. Out of
the total  sum of  Rs. 1,607.99	 which was  entrusted to the
appellant as  a Cash  cleric, he deposited Rs. 1,107.99 only
in the	Central Cash  Section  of  the	Delhi  Milk  Scheme.
Undoubtedly, he	 was guilty  of criminal breach of trust and
the learned  Magistrate had no option but to convict him for
that offence.  But, it is to be admired that as long back as
in 1963,  when section 235 of the Code of Criminal Procedure
was not	 on the	 Statute book  and later  refinements in the
norms of  sentencing were  not even  in embryo,	 the learned
Magistrate gave	 close and anxious attention to the sentence
which, in  the circumstances of the case, could be passed on
the appellant.	He says	 in his judgment The appellant was a
victim of  adverse circumstances;  his son  died in February
1962, which  was followed  by another  misfortune; his	wife
fell down from an upper storey and was seriously injured: it
was then the turn of his daughter who fell seriously ill and
that illness lasted for eight months. The learned Magistrate
concluded his judgment thus:
	  "Misfortune dodged the accused for
about a	 year... ...............  and it  seems that  it was
under the  force of  adverse circumstances that he held back
the maney in question. Shankar Dass is a middle aged man and
it is  obvious that  it was  under compelling  circumstances
that he	 could not deposit the money in question in time. He
is  not	  a  previous	convict.  Having   regard   to	 the
circumstances of  the case,  I am  of the  opinion  that  he
should be  dealt with  under the Probation of Offenders Act,
1958."
     It is  to be learned that despite these observations of
the learned  Magistrate, the Government chose to dismiss the
appellant in  a huff,  without	applying  its  mind  to	 the
penalty which could H
168
appropriately be  imposed upon	him in so far as his service
career was  concerned. Clause  (a) of  the second proviso to
Article	 311   (2)  of	 the  Constitution  confers  on	 the
Government the	power to  dismiss a  person from service "on
the ground  of conduct	which has led to his conviction on a
criminal charge".  But, that  power, like every other power,
has to	be exercised  fairly, justly  and reasonably. Surely
the Constitution  does not  contemplate	 that  a  Government
servant who  is convicted  for parking his scooter in a non-
parking area  should be	 dismissed  from  service.  He	may,
perhaps, not  be entitled  to be  heard on  the question  of
penalty since  clause (a)  of the  second proviso to Article
311(2) makes  the provisions  of that  article	inapplicable
when a	penalty is  to be imposed on a Government servant or
the ground  of conduct	which has led to his conviction on a
criminal charge.  But the  right to impose a penalty carries
with it	 the duty  to act  justly. Considering	the facts of
this case,  there can be no two opinions that the penalty of
dismissal  from	  service  imposed  upon  the  appellant  is
whimsical.
     Accordingly,  we  allow  this  appeal,  set  aside	 the
judgment of  the Delhi High Court dated October 10, 1972 and
direct that  the appellant  shall be  reinstated in  service
forthwith, with	 full  back  wages  from  the  date  of	 his
dismissal until	 reinstatement. The Government of India will
pay to	the appellant  the costs  of  the  suit,  the  First
Appeal, the  Second Appeal, the Letters Patent Appeal and of
this Appeal  which we  quantify at Rupees five thousand. The
appellant will	report for  duty punctually  at	 his  former
place of work on April 1, 1985.
     In this  brief  judgment,	we  have  referred  to	many
unhappy facts.	We must	 mention one  more. We had adjourned
this appeal after hearing it a while, in order to enable the
Government  to	consider  whether  the	appellant  could  be
reinstated in  service with  a reasonable  adjustment in the
payment of  back wages.	 The learned  counsel  appearing  on
behalf of the Union of India showed us a letter written by a
Deputy	Secretary  stating  that  the  Hon'ble	Minister  of
Agriculture desired  him to say that the Court should decide
the case  on merits.  We have  done our	 modest best in that
regard.
N.V.K					     Appeal allowed.
169




