

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
I.T.C. Ltd. Etc vs State Of Karnataka & Ors on 3 May, 1985Equivalent citations: 1985 SCR, Supl. (1) 145  1985 SCALE  (2)515
Author: S M Fazalali
Bench: Fazalali, Syed Murtaza
           PETITIONER:
I.T.C. LTD. ETC.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF KARNATAKA & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT03/05/1985

BENCH:
FAZALALI, SYED MURTAZA
BENCH:
FAZALALI, SYED MURTAZA
VARADARAJAN, A. (J)
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)

CITATION:
 1985 SCR  Supl. (1) 145  1985 SCALE  (2)515


ACT:
     Constitution of  India, Seventh  Schedule. Entry  52 of
List I,	 and Entries  22 and  66  of  List  II-"Industries"-
Tobacco	 Board	 Act  1975  (Central  Act)  passed  for	 the
development  of	  tobacco  industry-State  Act	subsequently
included tobacco  in its  Schedule and	levied market fee on
tobacco or  its products-Whether the provisions of the State
Act repugnant to the Central Act on this point.
     Karnataka Agricultural  Produce Marketing	(Regulation)
(Amendment) Act	 1966, Section 65 Enhancement and collection
of market  fee-Whether it  should have	direct nexus between
services randered  and the  amount collected-Levy  of market
fee found  to be  bad in law-Fee collected-Whether it should
be  refunded-Whether  the  State  legislature  competent  to
validate levy declared by Court as bad in law.



HEADNOTE:
     On 19th  May, 1975,  the State Government amended s. 65
of the Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation)
Act, 1966  by the  Karnataka Agricultural  Produce Marketing
(Regulation) (Amendment)  Act 24 of 1975. Sub-Section (1) of
S. 65  as it  stood after  the amendment  provided that	 the
Market Committee  shall levy  and collect  market  fee	from
every seller in respect of agricultural produce sold by such
seller in  the market  area at	the rate  of one  rupee	 per
hundred rupees	of the	price  of  such	 produce  sold.	 Sub
Section (2)  laid down	that the market Committee shall levy
and collect  market fee	 from  every  buyer  in	 respect  of
agricultural produce bought by such buyer in the market area
at such	 rate as  may be  specified in	the  bye-laws.	Sub-
Section (3)  stated that every market committee shall credit
to the	Karnataka Motor	 Vehicles Taxation  Act,  1957,	 the
market fee  collected under  sub-section (1) for being spent
for the	 purpose of  construction, repair,  improvement	 and
maintenance of	rural roads  in the State. On 2th September,
1978, the  High Court  struck down the amended section 65(1)
and (3) of the Act and upheld the levy on buyers at the rate
of one	rupee per  one hundred	rupees under s. 65(2) of the
Act in	Rajasekhariah's case  (ILR (1978)  Karnataka  1939).
Thereafter,  the   Karnataka  Ordinance	  2  of	  1979	 was
promulgated amending  ss. 63  and 65  of the Act. Section 63
was amended  with retrospective	 effect	 from  19.5.1975  by
substituting in	 clause (ii) of sub-section (1) of S. 63 the
words "transport  and marketing"  for the  word "marketing".
The  amended  S.  65(a)	 validated  market  fee	 levied	 and
collected under	 sub-section (1)  of S.	 65 for	 the  period
19.5.1975 to  28.9.1978; (b) omitted the amended sub-section
(1) of	S. 65  with effect  from 28.9.1978; (c) enhanced the
maximum permissible limit of market fee levied and
146
and collected  from buyers of specified agricultural produce
under sub-section  (2) of S. 65 from one per cent to two per
cent; and  (d) omitted	sub-section (3)	 of S.	65 as  if it
never existed  in  the	Statute.  The  Ordinance  was  later
replaced by  the Karnataka  Agricultural  Produce  Marketing
(Regulation) (Amendment) Act 17 of 1980 which also numerated
for the	 first time  cardamom and tobacco as an agricultural
produce for  the purpose  of the  Act. The Tobacco Board Act
1975 (Act  No. 4  of 1975)  which had  been passed  for	 the
development of the tobacco industry under the control of the
Union was  already in  existence before tobacco was included
in the Schedule to the Act, Section 42 of that Amendment Act
validated the  levy and	 collection of market fee during the
period 19.5.1975  to 28.9.1978.	 Pursuant to  the  amendment
made to	 sub-section 2	of S.  65 of the Act, all the Market
Committees in  the State  of Karnataka	except the Mangalore
Market Committee  amended the  bye-law by enhancing the levy
under S.  65(2) of the Act from one per cent to two per cent
on the directions of the Chief Marketing Officer and without
following the procedure laid down in S. 148 of the Act.
     The appellants/traders filed writ petitions in the High
Court challenging  the enhancement  of the levy from one per
cent to two per cent as well as the collection of market fee
from sellers  during the  period 19.5.1975 to 28.9.1978. The
High Court  directed the  Chief Marketing Officer to furnish
in  respect   of  each	 market	 committee  a  comprehensive
statement in  a tabulated  form setting	 out certain factors
which may  be  relevant	 for  considering  the	question  of
enhancement of	market fee.  During the	 hearing of the writ
petitions,  the	  respondent  State   promulgated  Karnataka
Ordinance No.  22 of 1981 dispensing with the requirement of
the previous  publication contemplated	in S. 148 of the Act
in relation  to making	of bye-laws  and amendments  thereof
with retrospective effect.
     The High Court held (1) that s. 65(1) as substituted by
the Act	 17 of	1980 and  S. 42	 of the	 Amendment Act	were
unconstitutional and liable to be struck down on the grounds
(1) that  before S.  65(3) was	struck down,  the  levy	 and
collection of  market fee  under S.  65(1), as it then stood
were for the benefit of the Karnataka Roads and Bridges Fund
constituted under the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation Act,
1957, and  that event  which had happened, namely, crediting
of the	market fee  to that  Fund cannot  be reversed by the
subsequent amendment  of S.  65(1) and introduction of S. 42
in the	Amendment Act  17 of  1980; (ii)  that	as  per	 the
decision of  the Supreme  Court in Kewal Krishan Puri's case
rural roads  are primarily  and essentially intended for the
benefit of  the public	and the	 class of  market fee payers
are, as	 part of the general public, entitled to the benefit
of their  user and  the market	fees cannot be levied on and
collected from	them for  that purpose,	 more so because the
rural roads  constructed, improved,  repaired and maintained
with the market fee collected did not become the property of
the market  committees or  shed their  character  as  public
roads;	(2)   that  sub-section	  65(2)	 does	not   confer
uncanalised and	 excessive power on market committees in the
matter of  fixing the  rate of market fee and that there are
adequate statutory  guidelines and  safeguards; (3)  that on
the materials placed, the levy ought nor to fail for want of
quid pro  quo. However,	 having regard	to  the	 infirmities
noticed in  the estimates  the High  Court is  unable to say
with any confidence that the enhancement of fee was
147
totally justified;  (4) that  S. 3 of the amending Ordinance
22 of  1981 validated  the bye-law, notwithstanding the fact
that the  affected interests  were not	heard  because	that
right has  been taken  away by	s.3 and	 5 of  the  amending
Ordinance 22  of 1981. However the Chief Marketing Officer's
direction can  be regarded  as	his  previous  sanction	 for
amending the  bye-laws; (5)  the question  whether S.  65(2)
must be	 held to  imply an  obligation on  the part  of	 the
market	committees  to	hear  affected	interested  parties,
before the  rate of  fee was  fixed was	 left  open  in	 the
judgment; (6)  that the	 provisions of	the Act in so far as
marketing of  cardamom is  concerned, are  repugnant to	 the
provisions of the Cardamom Act (Central Act 42 of 1965) but,
so far	as the	provisions of  the Tobacco  Board Act,	1975
(Central Act)  are concerned  it makes	provisions  only  in
relation to Virginia tobacco and not all varities of tobacco
and the	 Act is	 not repugnant	to  the	 provisions  of	 the
Tobacco Board  Act, and all that is necessary for the Market
Committee  is  to  obtain  auctioneer's	 licence  under	 the
provisions of the Tobacco Board Act.
     In the  appeals and  writ petitions  to this  Court the
appellants  and	  petitioners/traders  contended   that	 the
enhancement of	the market  fee from one per cent to two per
cent of	 the price  of the specified agricultural produce is
invalid on  two grounds	 : (1)	that the  item	of  expenses
envisaged for  the rural  roads has  gone with	the striking
down of	 s.65(1) and  (3) of  the Act  and the	omission  of
clause (3)  of s.65  from the Act by the Amendment Act 17 of
1980. However,	the amount  collected under that sub-section
will take  care of the proposed expenditure envisaged in the
estimates  and	 projections  for  the	improvement  of	 the
services in  the regulated  markets; and (ii) that reduction
of the	enhanced levy  from two	 per cent  to one  per	cent
subsequently by the State Government shows that there was no
justification for the enhancement of the market fee from one
per cent to two per cent; (2) that the amendment of the bye-
laws made  for enhancement  of the  market fee	from one per
cent to	 two  per  cent	 was  not  in  accordance  with	 the
procedure laid down by s. 148 of the Act and ss. 3, 5(a) and
5(b) of Ordinance 22 of 1981 promulgated during the pendency
of the	writ petitions	in the High Court would not cure the
defect; (3)  that S.65(1)  as substituted by Act 17 of 1980,
read with  s.42 of the Amending Act, seeking to validate the
collection of  market fee  on "sellers"	 made under  the old
s.65(1) of  the Act is constitutionally invalid, and (4) the
High Court erred in holding that the Tobacco Board Act, 1975
covers only  Virginia tobacco  and is  not repugnant  to the
provisions of  ss.8(2)(a), 8(3)	 and 12 of the Tobacco Board
Act and r.35 of the Rules made under that Act.
     On behalf of the respondents it was contended that quid
pro quo	 was established  in respect  of 73 out of 93 market
committees falling  in categories  `A', `B', `C' and `D' for
enhancement of	the market  fee from one per cent to two per
cent and  no further  enquiry was  needed in  view of  Kewal
Krishan Puri's case. (2) that there is no repugnancy between
the Act	 and the  Tobacco Board	 Act, 1975,  (3) that  after
s.65(3) has  been omitted from the Act there was no question
of striking down S.65(1) as substituted by the Amendment Act
17 of 1980 and since S.42 of the Amendment Act has validated
the levy,  there is  no question of refund of the market fee
collected under S.65(1).
148
     Dismissing	 all   the  civil   appeals,  special  leave
petitions and  the writ	 petitions except  C.A. No.  629  of
1983.
     (Per majority; Fazal Ali and Vardarajan, JJ.-Sabyasachi
Mukharji, J. dissenting)
^
     HELD :  1 (i)  A close and careful analysis of Articles
245 and	 246 shows  that the  Constitution  strikes  a	just
balance between	 the powers  of the Parliament and the State
Legislatures but  reserves to  itself the right to legislate
in exceptional	cases even in matters appearing in the State
List.  This   is  the	logical	 result	 and  the  necessary
concomitant of clause (4) of Art. 246. [168 E]
     (1)(ii)  The   cardinal   principles   justifying	 the
competency of  the respective  legislatures with  respect to
the entries concerned are : (a) Entries in each of the Lists
must  be   given  the	most  liberal  and  widest  possible
interpretation and  no attempt	should be  made to narrow or
whittle down  the scope	 of the entries; (b) the application
of the	doctrine of  pith and  substance really	 means	that
where a	 legislation falls  entirely within  the scope of an
entry within the competence of a State legislature then this
doctrine will apply and the Act will not be struck down; (c)
the consideration  of encroachment  or entrenchment  of	 one
List  in  another  and	the  extent  thereof  is  also	well
established. If	 entrenchment is minimal and does not affect
the dominant  part of  some other entry, which is not within
the competence	of the	State Legislature,  the Act  may  be
upheld	as   constitutionally  valid;  (d)  the	 nature	 and
character of  the scope	 of the entries having regard to the
touch stone  of the provisions of Arts. 245 and 246; and (e)
the doctrine  of occupied  field has  a great  place in	 the
interpretation as to whether or not a particular legislature
is competent  to legislate on a particular entry. This means
that when  the field  is completely occupied by List I, then
the State legislature is wholly incompetent to legislate and
no entrenchment	 or encroachment, minimal or otherwise, by a
State legislature  is permitted.  In other words, where, the
field  is   not	 wholly	  occupied,  then   a  mere  minimal
encroachment or	 entrenchment would  not affect the validity
of the State legislation. [168 F-H; 169 B-C; F-H]
     The five  principles have	to  be	read  and  construed
together and  not in  isolation-where, however,	 the Central
and the	 State legislation  cover the  same field  then	 the
central legislation  would prevail.  It is also well settled
that where  two Acts,  one passed  by the Parliament and the
other by  a  State  legislature	 collide  and  there  is  no
question of  harmonising them,	then the Central legislation
must prevail. There may also be cases where despite an entry
being in List II, the Parliament may under the provisions of
Art. 246(3) take over that particular field and legislate on
that subject  which will  debar the  State legislature	from
adding or  passing any such legislation which has been taken
over under Art. 246(3). [170 B-D]
     S.P. Mittal  v. Union  of India & Ors. [1985] 1 SCC 51;
Delhi Cloth  & General	Mills Co.  Ltd. v.  Union of India &
Ors. [1983]  4 SCC  167; Subrahmanyan Chettiar v. Muttuswami
Goundan AIR  [1941] F.C.  47: Zaverbhai	 Amaidas v. State of
Bombay [1955] 1 SCR 799; Deep Chand v. State of U.P.
149
JUDGMENT:
(Proprietary) Ltd.  v. State  of West  Bengal &	 Ors. [1962]
Supp. 3	 SCR 1; State of Orissa v. M.A. Tulloch & Co. [1964]
4 SCR  461; Sudhir  Chandra  Nawn  v.  Wealth  Tax  Officer,
Calcutta & Ors. [1969] 1 SCR 108; Baijnath Kedia v. State of
Bihar & Ors. [1970] 2 SCR 100, relied upon.
     (2) Once  the Centre takes over an industry under Entry
52 of  List 1 and passes an Act to regulate the legislation,
the State  legislature ceases  to have	any jurisdiction  to
legislate in  that field and if it does so, that legislation
would be ultra vires of the powers of the State legislature.
[174 H]
     (3)(i) In	the instant  case, by virtue of Notification
No.  374(3)   dated  31.5.80  the  Central  Government	made
applicable ss.	10 and	11 of  the 1975	 Act to the State of
Maharashtra, West  Bengal, Gujarat,  Tamil  Nadu  and  Uttar
Pradesh. By  making Rule 35 in the Tobacco Board Rules, 1976
(enacted under	s. 12 of the 1975 Act) the Market Committees
were debarred  from auctioning	or dealing in tobacco or its
products  unless   they	 were  registered  with	 the  Board.
Admittedly the	market Committees  of the State of Karnataka
had not	 been registered  with the  Tobacco Board  under the
1975 Act  and were,  therefore, incapable  of rendering	 any
service at  all. By a letter dated 15.9.83 the Tobacco Board
rejected the  application made	by the	Karnataka  State  to
allow it  to participate in auctioning the tobacco products.
It is  manifest, therefore,  that by virtue of the aforesaid
steps taken  by the central legislation the field of tobacco
stood  completely   occupied  and  there  was  no  room	 for
application of	the doctrine of pith and substance nor would
the question of incidental entrenchment arise in such cases.
[165 F-H; 167 C-D]
     (3)(ii) Even  if the President's assent would have been
taken it would not validate the Karnataka Act of 1980 so far
as the	Tobacco Industry  is concerned	because Art.  254(2)
applies only to matters contained in the Concurrent List and
has nothing  to do with matters enumerated in List I or List
II. Thus, the Karnataka Act of 1980 would have absolutely no
application to	entry 52  of List I which are fully occupied
by the Central Act of 1975. [175 C]
     This being	 the position,	this Court strikes down that
part of the Karnataka Act which takes in itself the power to
levy market  fee on  tobaco or	its products.  Even  if	 the
products may  be sold  in the  markets in  Karnataka or near
about the  same place  situated in that States, the power to
levy fee  will not belong to that State; it will remain with
the Centre  which would	 regulate the  sale and	 purchase of
tobacco. [175 F]
Per Mukharji, J. (dissenting) :
     1. The  provisions of  the Karnataka  Marketing Act and
Tobacco Board  Act and	the Rules  are not inconsistent. The
cardinal rule  of interpretation is that the words should be
read in	 their ordinary natural and grammatical meaning. But
words in  a constitutional  document conferring	 legislative
powers should  also be construed most liberally and in their
widest amplitude.  On the  construction of  the Central	 Act
read with the rules it is clear that the Central Act and the
declaration made  by section 2 of the Act cover all kinds of
tobac-
150
cos. Whether a particular legislation or enactment is within
the competence	of particular  legislature  must  be  judged
after finding  out the	pith and  substance, in other words,
the  true  nature  and	character,  of	the  legislation  in
question and  secondly the  entries in	the list  should  be
given liberal  and generous  construction. All	the  entries
should be  construed in	 harmonious manner  so as  to  avoid
conflict. In  case  of	conflict,  however,  in	 respect  of
entries where  both the	 State and the Centre can legislate,
the  Central   legislation  would  prevail  over  the  State
Legislation in view of the provisions of Articles 245 to 254
of the Constitution. [278 B; 271 E; 272 C; 271 C-D]
     Navinchandra Mafatlal  v. C  I.T. Bombay,	[1955] 1 SCR
829 at	page 836-37, Baijnath v. Bihar State [1970] 2 S.C.R.
100 at	113, Kannan  Devan Hills Co. v. Kerala, [1973] 1 SCR
356 at	369, Ganga  Sugar Co. Ltd. v. State of U.P, [1980] 1
SCR 769 at 781, referred to.
     2. (i)  It is  well-settled principle  that Article 246
recognised the	principle of  Parliamentary supremacy in the
field of  legislation in  case where  both legislatures have
competence   to	   legislate   (emphasis    supplied).	 The
constitutional	scheme	is  that  Parliament  has  full	 and
exclusive power to legislate with respect to matters in List
I and has also power to legislate with respect to matters in
List  III.  A  State  Legislature  has	exclusive  power  to
legislate with	respect to matters in List II, excluding the
matters falling	 in List  I and has also concurrent power to
legislate with	respect	 to  matters  falling  in  List	 III
excluding the  matters	falling	 in  List  I.  The  dominant
position of  the Central  Legislature with regard to matters
in List I and List III is established. [272 F-G]
     2.	 (ii)	The  principles	  of  repugnancy  in  Indian
Constitution are well-settled. These are as follows :-
     (a) A  legislation, which	in its	pith and  substance,
falls within  any of  the entries  of List  I of the Seventh
Schedule to  the Constitution,	would be  exclusively within
the competence of the Parliament. [276 B]
     (b) A  legislation falling exclusively, in its pith and
substance, within  any of  the entries	in List	 II  of	 the
Seventh Schedule,  would be  within the exclusive competence
of the State Legislature; [276 B]
     (c) A  Central law	 which in  its pith  and  substance,
falls within  any entry in List I would be valid even though
it might  contain incidental provisions in List II which may
contain ancillary  provisions which might touch on any entry
of List I incidentally; [276 C]
     (d) A  State law  which, in  its pith and substance, is
within any  entry in  List II  would be valid even though it
might incidentally  touch upon a subject falling within List
I; [276 D]
     (e) A  Central law,  which in  its pith  and substance,
dealt with a subject falling within List II would be bad and
ultra vires  the Constitution.	Similarly, a State law which
in its pith and substance dealt with a matter falling within
List I	would be  invalid and  ultra vires the Constitution;
and [276 E-F]
151
     (f) The  concept of  repugnancy arises only with regard
to laws dealing with subjects covered by the entries falling
in List	 III, in  respect of which both Parliament and State
Legislature are competent to legislate. Under Article 254 of
the Constitution, a State law passed in respect of a subject
matter comprised  in  List  III	 would	be  invalid  if	 its
provisions were	 repugnant to  a  law  passed  on  the	same
subject by  Parliament. The  repugnancy would  arise only if
both the  laws cannot  exist together.	Repugnancy does	 not
arise simply  because Parliament  and the States pass law on
the same subject. There can not be any repugnancy in respect
of State  laws passed  in respect of matters falling in pith
and substance  in List	II or  in respect  of  Central	laws
passed on  subjects falling  in List  I.  Parliament  cannot
legislate on a State subject and State cannot legislate on a
Central subject.  If either  trenches upon  the field of the
other, the law will be ultra vires. [276 G-H; 277 A]
     Subramanyam v.  Muthuswamy, [1940] 45 C.W.N. (FC) 1=AIR
1941 FC	 47 at	58, Sudhir  Chand  v.  Wealth  Tax  Officer,
Calcutta, [1969]  1 SCR	 108 at	 113 Ch. rika Ramji & Others
Etc. v.	 State of  Uttar Pradesh  & Others,  [1956] SCR 393,
State of Orissa v. M.A. Tulloch Co. [1964] 4 SCR 461 at 477,
M/s. Rochst  Pharmaceuticals Ltd.  & Others Etc. v. State of
Bihar and  Others etc,	Ramesh Chandra Etc. v. State of U.P.
Etc.,  [1983]	4  SCC	45  and	 The  Calcutta	Gas  Company
(Proprietary) Ltd.  v. The  State of West Bengal and Others,
[1962] 3 Supp. SCR 1 referred to.
     3. While  it is true that in the spheres very carefully
delineated,  the   Parliament  has   supremacy	over   State
Legislatures, supremacy	 in the	 sense that  in those fields
Parliamentary legislation  would hold  the field and not the
State legislation-but to denude the State Legislature of its
power to legislate where the legislation in question in pith
and substance i.e. in its true nature and character, belongs
to the	State field, one should be chary to denude the State
of its	power to  legislate and	 mobilise resources  because
that would be destructive of the spirit and purpose of India
being a Union of States. States must have power to raise and
mobilise resources in their exclusive fields. [280 B-C]
     4. (i)  In the instant case the Karnataka Marketing Act
deals with the subject of market in entry 28 read with entry
66 of  List II. Such Acts are covered by entry 28 of List II
exclusively  unlike  entries  23,  24,	26  and	 27.  It  is
important to  bear in  mind that  entry 28 is not subject to
withdrawal into list I by Parliament as under entries 52 and
54 of  List I and entry 33 of List III. The State Act is not
on a  subject in  List III-nor	is the	Central	 Act  a	 law
relating to any subject in List III. Therefore, there cannot
be any question of repugnancy. Section 31 of the Central Act
makes it  clear that  it does  not derogate from any law but
enacts something  in addition.	Essentially the	 Central Act
was for	 the development  of the  industry of  tobacco	and,
incidentally, certain  provisions for better sale of tobacco
through certain	 auction platforms  had been  made. There is
nothing in the Act or in the Rules which indicate that it is
inconsistent with  or cannot  be  operated  along  with	 the
marketing regulations. [277 F-G; 279 B-C]
     4. (ii)  It is fully manifest that both Act can operate
in their  respective fields  and there	is no  repugnancy if
both the Acts are considered in the light
152
of their  respective true nature and character. While giving
due  weight   to  Centre's   supremacy	in  the	 matters  of
legislation, the  States' legitimate  sphere of	 legislation
should not be unnecessarily whittled down-because that would
be unwarranted	by the	spirit	and  basic  purpose  of	 the
constitutional division	 of powers-not	merely allocation of
power by  the Constitution  but	 invasion  by  Parliamentary
legislations. By  complying with  the State Act, the Central
Act can	 function to  serve the	 purpose and  object of	 the
Central Act, but if only the Central Act was to prevail, the
State Act  of marketing	 for coffee  would become  non	est-
wholly unnecessary  and undesirable.  The Marketing  Act  is
essentially an Act to regulate the marketing of agricultural
produce; control of coffee industry would not be defeated if
the marketing of coffee is done within the provisions of the
Marketing Act.	It must therefore be held that the State Act
should prevail. One should avoid corroding the State's ambit
of powers  of legislations  which will	ultimately  lead  to
erosion of India being a Union of States. [279 F-G; 280 D-E]
     The Calcutta  Gas Company	(Proprietary)  Ltd.  v.	 The
State of  West Bengal  and Others,  [1962] 3  Supp.  SCR  1,
followed.
     Per majority,  Fazal Ali and Mukharji, JJ.-Varadarajan,
J. dissenting.
Per Fazal Ali, J.
     1. (i)  The levying  of market  fee  on  the  sale	 and
purchase of  agricultural products  in the  markets is not a
static event  but is  an ever changing concept. It has to be
medulated and adapted to the requirements and necessities of
the society,  the expanding needs of the nation and the ever
increasing trends  of the  rise in  prices. In	other words,
this is	 a dynamic  concept which keeps on changing. Thus it
is impossible  to lay  down a hard and fast rule which would
apply for  all times  to come.	Therefore, the	decision  in
Kewal Krishan  Puri's case  cannot be held to be law for all
times to  come irrespective  of	 the  period  nor  was	this
decision meant	to lay	down any such principle. [161 H; 162
B]
     (ii) The  one cardinal principle which flows from Kewal
Krishan Puri's case is that any fee or money realised should
not be	diverted to any other purpose except for the benefit
of the	purchaser/seller. What	would be  the nature  of the
service, when  and how	it should  be rendered	and in	what
measure is  entirely a	matter for  the market committees to
decide or  determine. So long as the money is realised, even
though on the higher side, but in spent on the extention and
expansion of  the markets,  market yards, market facilities,
godowns, rest  houses, buildings,  even roads  leading up to
the markets, that would be fully within the concept of a fee
and could  not be labelled as a tax on the purchasers at the
auction of goods or articles in the market. [161 H; 159 E]
     In the  instant case,  though the	fee appears to be on
the higher  side but there is unimpeachable evidence to show
that the  entire amount	 realised has not been spent on some
other object  or purpose  but has  been kept  in reserve for
developing the markets during the course of the coming 10-12
years. Though  this period  is large  but it  cannot be said
that there is no nexus between the services rendered and the
fee realised. Whether the development
153
takes place  immediately or in the course of a few years, so
long as	 it is	done within a reasonable period it cannot be
said that  the fee amounts to a tax and is, therefore, ultra
vires. [161 B-C]
     Kewal Krishan  Puri &  Anr. v.  State of  Punjab & Ors.
[1979] 3  SCR 1217,  Southern Pharmaceuticals  &  Chemicals,
Trichur &  Ors. etc. v. State of Kerala & Ors. etc. [1982] 1
SCR 519	 and Sreenivasa	 General Traders  & Ors. v. State of
Andhra Pradesh, [1983] 3 SCC 353 referred to.
Per Mukharji, J.
     1. Section 65(2) did not confer any arbitrary power and
there was  no excessive	 delegation of	legislative power to
the market  committees and  therefore not  vitiated on	that
account. The  question whether	on a  proper construction of
section 65(2)  there was  any obligation  on the part of the
marketing committee  to hear  the parties  was rightly	left
upon  by  the  High  Court  with  certain  observations	 and
directions contained  in its  judgment. So  far as  the High
Court held  against the	 contentions of	 the appellants that
bye-laws were  invalid for  want of  previous publication or
for want  of consulting the interests affected, I am also in
respectful agreement  for the  reasons discussed by the High
Court which  need not  be reiterated again. The principle of
audi alteram partem has application only to judicial, quasi-
judicial  and	administrative	functions  and	not  to	 any
legislative functions. [270 A-D]
     The Tulsipur  Sugar  Co.  Ltd.  v.	 The  Notified	Area
Committee, Tulsipur,  [1980] 2	SCR 1111  at pages  1118  to
1121, Avinder  Singh etc.  v. State  of Punjab	& Anr. Etc.,
[1979] 1 SCR 845, referred to.
     2. (i)  It is  well-settled that  though there  must be
some special  services to the payers of the fees to be a fee
it is  not necessary  that all	the services  must be to the
payers of  the fees  nor can the correlation between payment
of  fee	  and  services	  rendered   be	  established	with
mathematical exactitude. It is permissible in the modern set
up to take into account projections into future and not only
the present  services can  be utilised	for  justifying	 the
imposition of  fee. All	 planning, projects  into the future
for its	 existence and	survival. Any  incidental benefit to
those other  than the  payers of  the fee is not decisive of
the fact  whether it  is a `tax' or a `fee'. It is necessary
to find	 out the primary object and essential purpose of the
imposition (emphasis  supplied). If  the primary  object and
essential purpose  of the  imposition  be  service  of	some
special kind  to the  users of	the market  or payers of fee
other consequences or other benefits to others do not in the
least affect  the position.  The concept  of benefit  to the
users of  market must be looked at from a broad common sense
point  of  view,  taking  an  integrated  view.	 The  proper
principles are	: (1)  that  there  should  be	relationship
between service	 and  fee,  (2)	 that  the  relationship  is
reasonable   cannot   be   established	 with	mathematical
exactitude in  the sense  that both  sides must	 be  equally
balanced; (3)  in the  course of  rendering such services to
the payers of the fee if some other benefits accrue or arise
to others  quid-pro-quo is  not destroyed.  The	 concept  of
quid-pro-quo should  be judged in the context of the present
days-concept of markets which are expected to render various
services and provide various amenities
154
and these  benefits cannot  be divorced	 from  the  benefits
accruing incidentally  to  others;  (4)	 that  a  reasonable
projection for	the future  years  of  practical  scheme  is
permissible; (5)  services rendered  must be to the users of
those markets or to the subsequent users of those markets as
a class. Though fee is not levied as a part of common burden
yet service  and payment cannot exactly be balanced; and (6)
the  primary   object  and  the	 essential  purpose  of	 the
imposition must be looked into. [256 B-E; 260 F-H]
     Kewal Krishan  Puri v.  State of  Punjab, AIR 1980 S.C.
1008, H.  H. Shri  Swamiji of  Shri Admar  Mutt, etc. v. the
Commissioner,  Hindu   Religious  &   Charitable  Endowments
Department &  Ors. [1980]  1 SCR  368; Ramesh Chandra etc v.
State of  U.P. etc.  [1980] 3 SCR 104; Municipal Corporation
of Delhi  and Others  v. Mohd.	Yasin,	[1983]	3  SCC	229;
Southern Pharmaceuticals  & Chemicals Trichur & Ors. Etc. v.
State of  Kerala &  Ors. Etc.  [1982] 1 SCR - 19; Sreenivasa
General Traders	 and Others  v. State  of Andhra Pradesh and
Others, [1983]	4 SCC  353; Amar Nath Om Parkash & Ors. etc.
v. State of Punjab & Ors. Civil Appeal Nos. 4500 and 4501 of
1984 (decided on 19.11.1984), relied upon.
     In the  instant case,  having regard  to  the  detailed
analysis  of   the  expenditure	  of  the   various   market
committees, it	could not  be said  that the expenditure and
appropriation of fee was so disproportionate to the projects
actual and  projected that  it could  be said  that the levy
lost the character of fee. [261 B]
     2. (ii)  Construction of  rural roads giving facilities
for going  to the  market is a special service primarily and
directly intended  for the  benefit of	the users of market.
If, without  rural roads,  markets could  not be reached and
the  functions	 for  which   the  market   committees	were
constituted could  not be performed, if it is of fundamental
importance that	 there should  be a  net work of roadways if
effective aid  is to be given to buyers and sellers of goods
for marketing  their products, then the fact that the public
streets and  roads as trustees would be of no consequence in
considering such realisation as fee. [267 B; 268 B-C]
     In the  instant case,  the	 High  Court  was  error  in
holding that  the second  major defect	noticed in  the	 law
authorising the	 levy on  the sellers in Rajasekhariahs case
namely construction  of rural  roads would not qualify being
reckoned as a special service to the class of persons paying
the fee,  had not  been cured  or removed  by the  law which
sought to  validate  the  levy.	 The  Act  which  sought  to
validate the  levy contributed	to the	`Karnataka Roads and
Bridges Fund"  was for	the maintenance of rural roads which
forms an  integral part	 of the	 facilities for marketing of
the goods.  Therefore this  court is  unable to	 sustain the
findings of  the High  Court of Karnataka that section 65(1)
as substituted	by Section  20 of the Act 17 of 1980 as well
as section  42 of  the Amending Act was not constitutionally
valid and  was liable  to be struck down. These sections are
constitutionally valid	in view	 of the perspective in which
the concept of fee has to be judged. [268 D-G]
     Amar Nath	Om Parkash  & Ors.  etc. State	of Punjab  &
Ors., Civil  Appeal No.	 4500 and  4501 of  1984 (decided on
19.11.1984), followed.
155
 Municipal Corporation  of Delhi  and  Others  v.  Mohd.
Yasin, [1983] 3 SCC 229, relied upon.
     3. The  validity of  a validating	law has to be judged
mainly be  judging, firstly  whether a legislature possesses
competence  over   the	subject	  matter  i.e.,	 whether  by
validation, the	 legislature exercises	competence over	 the
subject	 matter	 and  secondly	whether	 by  validation	 the
legislature has removed the defect which the court had found
in the	previous law  and thirdly  whether it  is consistent
with the provisions of part III of the Constitution. Section
42 of  the Amending  Act is  valid and by virtue of the said
section, there cannot be any order for refund in the instant
case. [266 G; 269 F]
     Misrilal  Jain   etc.  etc.  v.  State  of	 Orissa	 and
Another., AIR  1977 SC	1686-[1977] 3  SCR 714: Shri Prithvi
Cotton Mills  Ltd. Anr.	 v. Broach  Borough  Municipality  &
Ors.,  AIR   1970  SC	192=[1970]  1	SCR  388;  Municipal
Corporation of	City of Ahmedabad, etc. v. New Shorock Spg &
Wvg. Co.  Ltd. etc., AIR 1970 SC 1292=[1971] 1 SCR 288; I.N.
Sakeena v.  The State  of Madhya  Pradesh, AIR	1976 SC 2650
[1976] 3 SCR 237; relied upon.
     4. Section	 42 of	the Amending  Act  has	specifically
provided against  refund of  levy of fees already collected.
At no  stage was  it claimed  or stated that the traders had
paid market  fees themselves.  The  appellants	before	this
Court are  buyers in  the market  but  they  themselves	 are
trading in  the commodities  purchased by  them. On  further
sale of	 the commodities  as traders they have recovered the
fees from their purchasers. Therefore, in view of section 42
of the Amending Act which provided for the validation of the
levy of	 market fee  and which	provided further  by section
42(1)(b) and  (c) that	no proceedings for refund would lie,
there cannot  be any  order of	refund in  the instant case.
[269 A-B; D]
     5. (i)  The High Court was competent to give directions
and the	 same were  within the	competence of the High Court
while dealing  with grievances made under Article 226 of the
Constitution to ensure that appropriate statuary authorities
acted according to law after properly ascertaining the facts
and for the purpose of rending fully justice to the parties.
[261 H; 262 A]
     5. (ii)  Courts of	 today cannot  and do not any longer
remain passive	with the  negative attitude, merely striking
down a	law or preventing something, being done. While it is
true that if a law is bad, the Court must strike it down, if
the law	 by and	 large and  in its  true perspective is of a
social purpose	if implemented	in a particular manner could
be  valid,  then  the  Court  can  and	should	ensure	that
implementation should  be done in such particular manner and
give directions to that effect. [263 A-B]
     In the  instant case, the High Court having found, that
basically and  essentially the	fee  was  justified  on	 the
theory of  quid pro  quo, the  Court was  entitled  to	give
positive directions  regards the  manner the money should be
spent. [263 C]
156
     Per Varadarajan, J. (dissenting)
     1. There  is no  correlation between the enhancement of
the rate  of the market fee leviable under s. 65(2) from one
per cent  to two  per cent  and	 the  services	rendered  or
proposed to  be	 rendered  by  the  Market  Committees	and,
therefore, the	enhancement is	invalid in  law, It  is	 not
necessary to establish the element of quid pro quo in regard
to market  fees with  arithmetical exactitude, but an amount
of fee	must be	 earmarked for	rendering  services  to	 the
buyers	in   the  notified   market  area  and	a  good	 and
substantial portion  of it  must be shown to be expended for
those purposes.	 The good  and substantial portion earmarked
for rendering  services may  be in  the neighbourhood of two
thirds or three-fourths and it must be shown with reasonable
certainty as  being spent for rendering services of the kind
mentioned in Kewal Krishan Puri's case. [213 F; 213 B-C]
     In facts  and circumstances of the case, the High Court
should have held that there is no correlation and that there
is no  justification for  enhancement of  the  rate  of	 the
market fee. The learned judges of the High Court have failed
to exercise  the jurisdiction  vested in  them by law by not
recording any  finding one  way or the other on the question
of correlation,	 and  that  they  have	clothed	 the  Market
Committees  and	 the  Chief  Marketing	Officer	 with  their
jurisdiction to	 decide the question whether the enhancement
is justified  and if  not justified  to effect	a  down-ward
revision wherever necessary. [220 A-B]
     Kewal Krishan  Puri v.  State of  Punjab, [1973]  3 SCR
1217, followed.
     2(i) Enhancement  of the  rate of	market fee  leviable
under s. 65(2) of the Act by Amendments of the bye-laws from
one per	 cent to  two per  cent of the price of the notified
agricultural produce  is invalid  in law  for non-compliance
with the  law laid down in Kewal Krishan Puri's case. If the
market	fee   is  sought   to  be  raised,  proper  budgets,
estimates, balance-sheets  showing the	money in hand and in
deposit, expenditure  on  projects  to	be  undertaken	etc.
should be  carefully prepared.	Then and only then there may
be a  legal justification for raising the rate of the market
fee further  to a  reasonable  extent,	for  only  then	 the
authorities will be able to know the correct position and to
decide reasonably  as to  what extent  the  raising  of	 the
market fee  can be justified, taking an over-all view of the
matter. [228 C; 213 C-D]
     2 (ii) Admittedly, there was no previous publication as
required by  s. 148(1) as it stood at the relevant time, and
that requirement  is purported	to have	 been dispensed with
retrospectively by  s 3	 of Ordinance 22 of 1981. Market fee
is not a tax which is imposed by law passed by a Legislature
where the  interests affected  are or  are  supposed  to  be
represented unlike the market fee the enhancement whereof is
made by	 subordinate legislation  by way of amendment of the
relevant by-laws  by the  Market Committees. That is why the
provision for  previous publication was made in s. 148(1) of
the Act	 as it stood at the relevant time. Previous approval
can only be of some
157
proposal or  resolution of  the Market Committees for during
one or the other of the things required to be done under the
provisions of  the Act.	 When undisputably there was no such
resolution  or	 proposal  by	the  Market  Committees	 for
enhancement of	the rate  of the market fee, it is difficult
to see	how the	 direction of  the Chief  Marketing  Officer
given to  the Market  Committees to  amend the	bye-laws for
raising the  rate of the market fee from one per cent to two
per cent  can be considered to be his approval. The right of
the affected  interests of  being heard	 before	 the  Market
Committees could  raise the  rate of  the market fee being a
right available	 to them  under the  principles	 of  natural
justice cannot	be denied  to them  even by  omitting in  s.
148(1) the  clause relating  to previous  publication of the
proposal to  make or  amend any	 bye-law under s. 148 of the
Act. In	 any event  the amendment  has not  taken  away	 the
requirement of	previous approval  of  the  Chief  Marketing
Officer, and  since there  was no  resolution or proposal of
the Market  Committees to enhance the rate of the market fee
before the Chief Marketing Officer gave the direction to the
Market Committees  to amend  the bye-laws  for	ralsing	 the
market	fee  the  direction  cannot  be	 taken	as  previous
approval of  something which  was not  in existence  at that
time. Therefore,  the amendment	 of the	 bye-laws  made	 for
enhancement of	the rate of the market fee from one per cent
to two	per cent  is invalid  in law notwithstanding s. 3 of
Ordinance 22 of 1981 and s. 12 of Karnataka Act 4 of 1982.
[222 E; G-H; D-E ; 223 D-F]
     In the  present cases,  none of  these requirements was
satisfied before  the market  fee  was	raised.	 The  Market
Committees had	no such	 material before  them	before	they
raised the  rate  of  the  market  fee	from  one  per	cent
uniformly to two per cent by amendment of the bye-law on the
more direction of the Chief Marketing Officer. Therefore the
enhancement of	the market  fee from one per cent to two per
cent by amendment of the bye-law under the directions of the
Chief  Marketing   Officer  without   complying	  with	 the
principles of  law laid down in Kewal Krishan Puri's case is
bad in	law The	 same would  be the  position  even  if	 the
amendment to  the bye-law was made in accordance with s. 148
of the Act as it stood before the amendment by the Ordinance
22 of 1981. [213 E; 214 G-H]
     3. The  High Court	 has erred  in giving  the direction
dated  30.11.1981   to	the   Chief  Marketing	Officer	 for
furnishing a  comprehensive statement  in respect of each of
the Market Committees in a tabular form. The High Court has,
thus, given  an opportunity to the Market Committees to fill
up the lacuna since the materials supplied thereafter by way
of Ex.	R-1 to	R-111 and  similar statements perused by the
High Court  were not  available either	on the	date of	 the
amendment of  the bye-law  enhancing the  rate of the market
fee from  one per  cent to two per cent or even on the dates
on which  the Writ  Petitions were  filed in the High Court.
[215 D-E]
     4. S.  65(1) of the Act as substituted by the Amendment
Act 24	of 1975	 and Act  17 of 1980, and s. 42 of Amendment
Act 17	of 1980	 in so far as it seeks to save what has been
done under  s. 65  (1) of  the Act  are unconstitutional and
have been  rightly struck  down by  the High Court; the quid
pro quo	 for the levy under substituted s. 65 (1) on sellers
was the construction, repair, improve-
158
ment and  maintenance of  rural roads  which  is  no  longer
permissible to	be done	 out of	 moneys collected  as market
fees There  is thus  no quid  pro quo  to any extent for the
levy under  the	 substituted  s.  65  (1)  of  the  Act	 and
therefore, it  fails, and  it is not protected even by s. 42
of the	Amendment Act 17 of 1980 and has been rightly struck
down by the High Court. S 42 of the Amendment Act 17 of 1980
in so  far as  it seeks	 to save  the levy and collection of
market fee on sellers under the substituted s. 65 (1) cannot
also stand. [226 H; 227 A-B
     5.	 There	shall  be  no  refund  of  the	market	fees
collected under	 the substituted  s. 65	 (1) or	 excess	 fee
collected under	 s. 65 (2) either by the State Government or
by any of the Market Committees. [227 H]
     The  market   fee	collected  from	 sellers  under	 the
substituted s.	65  (1)	 must  have  been  credited  to	 the
Karnataka Roads and Bridges Fund and used for the purpose of
construction, repair,  improvement and	maintenance of rural
roads which  are undoubtedly  for the benefit of the general
public. The  excess fee collected under s. 65 (2) of the Act
also must  have been  utilised for the purposes contemplated
by the	Act. The persons from whom they have been collected,
sellers and  buyers, would naturally have passed on the levy
to those  who purchased	 the agricultural  produce from them
and  the  levy	must  have  ultimately	been  borne  by	 the
consumers of  the produce.  Any refund	would go  to  unjust
enrichment  of	 the  persons	from  whom  they  have	been
collected. In these circumstances no order for refund of the
market fee collected under the substituted s. 65 (1) and the
excess market fee collected under s. 65 (2) of the Act could
be made in these cases. [227 F-H]
     M/s. Amarnath  Om Prakash	& Ors.	v. State  of  Punjab
[1975] 3 SCR 475 followed.
 Southern Pharmaceuticals  and  Chemicals  v.  State  of
Kerala &  Ors. etc.  [1982] 1  SCR 519, Mahant Sri Jagannath
v. State  of Orissa,  [1954] SCR  1046, Rathilal Param Chand
Gandhi v.  State of  Bombay,  [1954]  SCR  1055,  Sreenivasa
General Traders	 & Ors. v. State of Andhra Pradesh, [1983] 3
SCR 843	 and Municipal	Corporation of Delhi v. Mohd. Yasin,
[1983] 3 SCR 229, referred to.

&
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION :Civil  Appeal Nos.	605-
2526, 3528-3632, 4356-5278, 6977-7173, 7514-8199, 8921-9939,
of 1983	 and Special  Leave Petitions Nos. 3419-20 and 7087-
7111 of 1983 and Writ Petition No. 6859 of 1982.
     From the  Judgment and  Order dated  25.1.1982  of	 the
Karnataka High	Court in  Civil Writ  Petition No.  12133 of
1979.
     Soli J. Sorabjee, Dr. Y.S. Chitale, V.M. Tarkunde, S.N.
Kacker, S.N.  Haksar, Mrs.  A.K. Verma,	 Aditya Narain, D.N.
Misra, E.R. Inder Kumar, Mukul Mudgal, Mrs. S. Ramachandran,
P.H. Parekh,  Mrs. Manju  Sharma, Ms.  Divya K. Bhalla, S.S.
Javali, B.P.  Singh, and  Ranjit  Kumar	 for  the  appearing
Appellants.
159
     P.R. Mridul,  S.T. Desai,	H.B. Datar, R.P. Bhatt, K.L.
Sharma, A.K.  Sen, B.G. Sridharan, Devendra Singh, Mrs. Bina
Tamta, R.B.  Datar, Swaraj Kaushal, V.C. Brahmraijappa, K.N.
Madhysoodhnan, E.C.  Vidyasagar, M.  Veerappa, Ashok  Kumar,
B.G. Shreedharan and R.B. Datar for the Respondents.
     The following Judgments were delivered
     FAZAL  ALI,  J.  I	 have  carefully  gone	through	 the
judgment  of  my  learned  Brother,  Mukharji,	J.,  on	 the
question of  fee  levied  by  the  Karnataka  State  on	 the
agricultural produce  brought to the market for sale in that
State. The  theory of  nexus between  the fee levied and the
services rendered cannot be reduced to a ritualistic formula
so as to close it in a straitjacket nor can it be weighed in
golden scales  All that is necessary is that there should be
a direct  nexus between realisation of fees and the services
rendered. What would be the nature of the services, when and
how it	should be rendered and in what measure is entirely a
matter for  the market committees to decide or determine. So
long as	 the money  is realised,  even though  on the higher
side, but  is spent  on the  extention and  expansion of the
markets, market	 yards,	 market	 facilities,  godowns,	rest
houses, buildings,  even roads	leading up  to the  markets,
that would  be fully  within the  concept of a fee and could
not be	labelled as a tax on the purchasers at the action of
goods or  articles in  the market. It is, however, difficult
to lay	down any  hard and  fast rule  for  determining	 the
extent and  contours of the services that should be rendered
by the	Government while  imposing a  fee. All	that the law
requires is  that  the	amount	of  fee	 realised  from	 the
purchasers should  be spent  for the purposes of the market.
For instance,  if the  fee is  on the  higher side  but	 the
excess	amount	 is  reserved  for  the	 present  or  future
expansion of  the market,  the provision  for making further
facilities, the	 building up  of roads	upto  the  point  of
markets so  as to benefit the purchasers and make there task
easier to  collect all	their goods at one place or to build
rest houses  for their stay while transacting their business
in which  case any  reasonable	fee  levied  by	 the  market
committees would  be justifiable.  It may  be that sometimes
there may  be a	 huge rush  of arrivals	 of  goods  and	 the
purchasers/sellers may have to wait for a day or two or even
a week	to buy	or sell	 the goods  in such cases it will be
sufficient if  the fee realised, even if it is in excess, is
reserved  exclusively  for  the	 purpose  of  expansion	 and
development of	the markets  or market	buildings  or  roads
leading up to the markets.
160
     I am  not persuaded  to accept  the argument  that	 the
facts of  the present case are fully covered by the decision
of this	 Court in  Kewal Krishan  Puri &  Anr. v.  State  of
Punjab &  Ors.(1) That case must be read in the light of the
peculiar facts	before the  Court. I do not consider this to
be an  authority for all times to levy a fee of Rs. 2 or Re.
1 per  100 in  all cases  irrespective of  the merits of the
case. The  problem of marketing in a developing country like
ours has  assumed very large proportions and the market fees
are required  to provide excellent facilities for extension,
expansion and  development of  markets.	 In  doing  so,	 the
Government can	construct roads	 by converting	rural  roads
into  tarred   ones  in	  order	 to   provide  all  possible
convenience to	the purchasers	and boost up the sales. What
Kewal Krishan  Puri's case  decided was that in the facts of
that case  there was  no clear nexus between the fee and the
services rendered.  In Southern Pharmaceuticals & Chemicals,
Trichur &  Ors. etc. v. State of Kerala & Ors. etc.,(2) A.P.
Sen, J. speaking for the Court observed thus :
	  "the Constitution  did not contemplate it to be an
     essential element	of a  fee that it should be credited
     to a separate fund and not the consolidated fund. It is
     also increasingly realised that the element of quid pro
     quo stricto  senso is  not always	a sine	qua non of a
     fee.
	  ...		 ...		...
     Our attention  has been  drawn to	the observations  in
     Kewal Krishan  Puri &  Anr. v. State of Punjab & Ors. 1
     (1979 (3) SCR 1217 at 1230) :
	  The element  of quid	pro quo	 must be established
     between the payer of the fee and the authority charging
     it. It  may not  be exact	equivalent of  the fee	by a
     mathematical  precision,	yet,  by   and	 large,	  or
     predominantly, the	 authority collecting  the fee	must
     show that	the service which they are rendering in lieu
     of fee  is for some special benefit of the payer of the
     fee.
	  To our  mind, these  observations are not intended
     and  meant	  as  laying   down  a	 rule  of  universal
     application."
161
     The one  cardinal	principle  which  flows	 from  Kewal
Krishan Puri's	case  (supra)  is  that	 any  fee  or  money
realised should	 not be diverted to any other purpose except
for the	 benefit of  the purchaser/seller.  In	the  instant
case, though  the fee  appears to  be on the higher side but
there is  unimpeachable evidence  to show  that	 the  entire
amount realised	 has not  been spent on some other object or
purpose but  has been  kept in	reserve for  developing	 the
markets during	the course of the coming 10-12 years. Though
this period  is large but it cannot be said that there is no
nexus between  the fee	realised.  Whether  the	 development
takes place  immediately or in the course of a few years, so
long as it is done with in a reasonable period, it cannot be
said that  the fee amounts to a tax and is, therefore, ultra
vires.
 In Sreenivasa General Traders & Ors. v. State of Andhra
Pradesh,(1) this Court observed as follows:
	  "With greatest  respect,  the	 decision  in  Kewal
     Krishan   Puri's case  does  not  lay  down  any  legal
     principle of general applicability.
     ...		     ...		       ...
	  The traditional  view that  there must  be  actual
     quid pro  quo for	a fee  has undergone a sea change in
     the subsequent  decisions.. In  determining  whether  a
     levy is  a fee,  the true	test  must  be	whether	 its
     primary and  essential purpose  is to  render  specific
     services to  a specified area or class, it may be of no
     consequence  that	 the  State   may   ultimately	 and
     indirectly	  be	benefited    by	   it...    However,
     correlationship  between  the  levy  and  the  services
     rendered (sic  or) expected is one of general character
     and not of mathematical exactitude."
     I might  observe here that the levying of market fee on
the sale  and  purchase	 of  agricultural  products  in	 the
markets is  not a  static event	 but  is  an  ever  changing
concept.  It   has  to	be  modulated  and  adapted  to	 the
requirements and  necessities of  the society, the expanding
needs of  the nation  and the every increasing trends sf the
rise in	 prices. In  other words,  this is a dynamic concept
which
     (1) [1983] 3 S.C.R. 353.
162
keeps on changing. For instance, it cannot be said that what
is good	 for the  70 crores  people of	today will also hold
good when  the population jumps to 75 crores or even more in
the course  of another 5-10 years. Thus, it is impossible to
lay down  a hard  and fast  rule which	wôõld apply  for all
times to  come. Therefore,  the decision  in  Kewal  Krishan
Puri's case  cannot be	held to be law for all times to come
irrespective of	 the period  nor was  this decision meant to
lay down any such principle. I, therefore, with due respect,
agree with  the observations  made and	the detailed  survey
done by Brother Mukharji, J. This disposes of the first limb
of the	question of  levy of  fee so far as the agricultural
produce in Karnataka State is concerned.
		Civil Appeal No. 629 of 1983
     This now  brings me  to the  second important question,
viz., whether  the Karnataka Government was entitled to levy
fee on the goods or the various products and sub-products of
tobacco. The  question is  not free  from doubt.  Since	 the
inception of  this Court,  which was  the precursor  of	 the
Federal Court,	it has	been  laid  down  that	the  various
entries found  in the three Lists of the Seventh Schedule of
the  Constitution   of	India	are  demarcated	  fields  of
legislation  and   their  contours   and  limits  have	been
expressely described  in the  entries mentioned	 in the said
three Lists. each State is free and independent to legislate
on the field which is covered by the State List (List II) or
the Concurrent	List  (List  III).  So	far  as	 List  I  is
concerned that	is reserved  purely for	 Parliament for	 any
legistation to	be made. So far so good. The most knotty and
difficult problem  arises when	we find	 that there  is some
sort of an inconsistency or convict or collision between the
two Lists  (List I  and II)  whether the  State List  or the
Union List  should prevail.  the instant  case we are really
concerned with the question of tobacco industry. Entry 52 of
List I	(Union List)  which lays down and fixes the subjects
of legislation	to   be made  by Parliament may be extracted
thus:
	  "52. Industries, the control of which by the Union
     is declared by Parliament by law to be expedient in the
     public interest."
     Two problems, however, may arise. The word 'Industries'
is very	 wide and has been used in the other two Lists also.
Where a	 particular industry  falls clearly  within the four
corners of entry
163
No. 52	then the  State has  no jurisdiction to legislate on
that particular	 field if  that field  is occupied  and	 the
doctrine of  occupied field A would apply. Difficulty arises
in borderline  cases where  an industry has been declared by
the Centre under entry 52 of List I and this entry overlaps,
to a  great extent,  the corresponding entry in List II. The
question arises as to whether the Central List would prevail
or the State List.
     In the  instant case what has happened is that although
the tobacco  industry has been notified as having been taken
over under  entry 52  of List  I  yet  the  Karnataka  State
started levying fee on the tobacco or its products. In order
to appreciate  whether or  not the  field was fully occupied
and there  could not  be encroachment  on this	fee  by	 the
Karnataka State	 a brief  history of the Central legislation
may be given.
     As already mentioned, entry 52 of List I authorises the
Central legislature  (Parliament) to  take over any industry
it likes,  tobacco  being  no  exception.  It  is  also	 not
disputed that by virtue of the Tobacco Board Act, 1975, (for
short, referred	 as '1975  Act'). The  Parliament  chose  to
occupy the  entire field tobacco industry which includes all
kinds of tobacco and its by-products and not merely Virginia
tobacco. It  may be  necessary to  extract  a  few  relevant
portions from the Act:-
	  "2.It is  hereby declared  that it is expendent in
     the public	 interest that	the Union  should take under
     its control the tobacco industry.
	  3.(a)	    "Board"   means    the   Tobacco   Board
     established under section 4;
	  (d)"dealer" means a dealer in tobacco;
	  (f)  "export"	 and  "import"	mean,  respectively,
     taking out of, or bringing into, India, by land, sea or
     air;
	  4.(3)	    The head office of the Board shall be at
     Guntur in	the State  of Andhra  Pradesh and  the Board
     may,  with	  the  previous	  approval  of	the  Central
     Government, establish  offices  or	 agencies  at  other
     places in or outside India.
164
	  7. (1)  The Board may appoint such committees as A
     may be  necessary for  the efficient  discharge of	 its
     duties and performance of its functions under this Act.
	  8. (1)  It shall  be the  duty  of  the  Board  to
     promote,  by  such	 measures  as  it  thinks  fit,	 the
     development under the control of the Central Government
     of the tobacco industry.
	  (2) Without  prejudice to  the generality  of	 the
     provisions of sub-section (1), the measures referred to
     therein may provide for-
	  (a)  regulating   the	 production  and  curing  of
     virginia tobacco  having regard to the demand therefore
     in India and abroad;
	  (c)  maintenance   and  improvement	of  existing
     markets, and  development of  new markets outside India
     for  Indian  virginia  tobacco  and  its  products	 and
     devising  of  marketing  strategy	in  consonance	with
     demand for the commodity outside India, including group
     marketing under limited brand names;
	  (cc)	establishment	by  the	  Board	 of  auction
     platforms, with  the previous  approval of	 the Central
     Government,  for	the  sale  of  virginia	 tobacco  by
     registered grower	or curers,  and functioning  of	 the
     Board  as	 an   auctioner	  at   auction	 planteforms
     established by  or registered  withit subject  to	such
     conditions	 as   may  be	specifited  by	the  Central
     Government;
	  (g) purchasing  virginia tobacco from growers when
     the same  is  considered  necessary  or  expedient	 for
     protecting the interests of the growers and disposal of
     the same  in India	 or abroad  as and  when  considered
     appropriate;
	  (i)	sponsoring,   assisting,   coordinating	  or
     encouraging  scientific,	technological  and  economic
     research for the promotion of tobacco industry,
	  (i) Such other matters as may be prescribed.
165
	  14 A	(1). Where  Virginia tobacco  is sold at any
     auction platform  established by  the Board  under this
     Act, A  it shall  be competent for the Board or for any
     officer of the Board authorised by it in this behalf to
     levy fees,	 for the  services rendered  by the Board in
     relation to  such sale,  at such rate not exceeding two
     per cent  of the  value of	 such tobacco as the Central
     Government may from time to time by notification in the
     Official Gazette, specify.
	  (2) The fees levied under sub-section (1) shall be
     collected by  the Board  or such  officer, equally from
     the seller of the virginia tobacco and the purchaser of
     such tobacco, in such manner as may be prescribed.
	  20. (1)  The	Central	 Government  may,  by  order
     published in  the Official	 Gazette, make provision for
     prohibiting, restricting  or otherwise  controlling the
     import or	export of tobacco products, either generally
     or in specified classes of cases.
	  (2) All  tobacco and tobacco products to which any
     order under sub-section (1) applies, shall be deemed to
     be goods  of  which  the  import  or  export  has	been
     prohibited under  section 11  of the  Customs Act, 1962
     and all  the provisions  of that  Act shall have effect
     accordingly."
     By virtue	of Notification	 No 374(3) dated 31.5.80 the
Central Government made applicable ss. 10 and 11 of the 1975
Act to	tho States  of Maharashtra,  West  Bengal,  Gujarat,
Tamil Nadu  & Uttar  Pradesh. It  may, however, be mentioned
that by	 making Rule  35 in  the Tobacco  Board Rules,	1976
(enacted under	s. 12 of the 1975 Act) the Market Committees
were debarred  from auctioning	or dealing in tobacco or its
products unless	 they were  registered with the Board. It is
also admitted  that the	 Market Committees  of the  State of
Karnataka had  not been	 registered with  the Tobacco  Board
under  the  1975  Act  and  were,  therefore,  incapable  of
rendering any  service	at  all.  Though  some	Markets	 are
situated in  Karnataka State  but that, to my kind, makes no
difference because  the Central	 legislation applies  to the
whole country.	This appears to be the constitutional scheme
of the	three Lists  which separately demarcate their fileds
and
166
it is  now well	 settled that  one cannot  encroach  on	 the
other. For  A instance,	 take the  case of Railways which is
mentioned in  List I  and is  fully covered  by the entry in
that List.  Though the	railways may  pass  through  various
States it  can neither	be contended  nor imagined that each
State would be competent to legislate by passing regulations
or Acts	 for the  working of  the railways  with respect  to
areas through  which they  pass. This  is exactly  the	case
here. When  the Parliament  took over  the tobacco  industry
without any  preconditions or  permutations and combinations
and established	 a Tobacco Board for regulating the sale and
purchase of  tobacco under  entry 52  of List  I the  entire
field of  tobacco industry  was fully  occupied and  nothing
remained for the States to do, and thus neither the doctrine
of entrenchment	 nor that  of pith  and substance would have
any application.
     The crucial  point for  determination in  this cases is
whether the Karnataka State had any jurisdiction to encroach
upon the  limits of  entry 52  of List	I and the court will
have to closely examine the encroachment or entrenchment and
the extent  of the  same. Where	 the court is of the opinion
that the  encroachment or  entrenchment amounts to defeating
the very  object sought	 to  be	 subserved  by	the  Central
legislation then the Central legislation must prevail. Where
it is  a borderline case and covered almost fully by List II
but in	the course  of the implemention of the same there is
an entrenchment	 or encroachment  which is only minimal, the
question of  the doctrine of pith and substance will come in
to play	 and the State will be justified in legislating over
the subject concerned.
     In the  instant case  we are concerned only with List I
(Union List)  and List	II (State List) of Seventh Schedule.
The matter in dispute falls within the four corners of entry
52 of  List I  and entries  28 and  66 of  List II. It h not
disputed as  discussed above that by virture of the 1975 Act
the central  legislation had  taken  within  its  ambit	 the
entire tobacco	industry. The  matter  does  not  rest	here
alone. It  appears  that  the  central	legislation  made  a
provision for  sale and	 distribution  of  tobacco  products
through the  Tobacco Board  and sellers	 were directed to be
registered with the Board. Clause (cc) of sub-s. (2) of s. 8
of the	1975 Act  enjoins establishment of auction platforms
with the  approval of  the Central  Government for  sale  of
tobacco products.  Section 12  of the  1975 Act	 deals	with
registration of	 Exporters, packers, auctioneers and dealers
of tobacco and may be reproduced thus:
167
	  "12. No person shall export tobacco or any tobacco
     products or  function as  a packer,  auctioneer of,  or
     dealer A  in, tobacco  unless he registers himself with
     the Board	in accordance with the rules made under this
     Act."
 Section 13	 states that  virginia tobacco shall be sold
only at	 in auction  platform registered  with the Board and
runs thus:
	  "13. No  registered grower  or curer shall sell or
     cause to  be sold virginia tobacco elsewhere than at an
     auction  platform	 registered  with   the	  Board	  in
     accordance	 with	rules  made   under  this   Act,  or
     established by the Board under this Act."
     By a  letter dated	 15.9.83 the  Tobacco Board rejected
the application	 made by  the Karnataka State to allow it to
participate  in	 auctioning  the  tobacco  products.  It  is
manifest therefore  that by  virtue of	the aforesaid  steps
taken by  the central legislation the field of tobacco stood
completely occupied and there was no room for application of
the doctrine of pith and substance nor would the question of
the incidental entrenchment arise in such cases.
     I shall  now discuss  the law  on the subject which has
been well  settled by  a long  course  of  decision  of	 the
Federal Court,	the Privy  Council, House  of Lords and this
Court. Before doing that it may be necessary to extract the.
relevant provisions of Arts. 245 and 246 of the Constitution
which may be extracted thus:
	  "245. Extent of laws made by Parliament and by the
     Legislatures of State
	  (1)	Subject	   to	the   provisions   of	this
     Constitution, Parliament may make laws for the whole or
     any part of the territory of India, and the Legislature
     of a  State may  make laws for the whole or any part of
     the State.
	  (2) No  law made  by Parliament shall be deemed to
     be invalid	 on the	 ground that  it  would	 have  extra
     territorial operation-
	  246. Subject-matter of laws made by Parliament and
     by the Legislatures of States
168
	  (1) Notwithstanding  anything in  clauses (2)	 and
     (3),   Parliament has exclusive power to make laws with
     respect to	 any of	 the matters enumerated in List I in
     Seventh Schedule  (in this	 Constitution referred to as
     the "Union List).
	  (3)  Subject	 to  clauses   (1)  and	  (2),	 the
     Legislature of  any State	has exclusive  power to make
     laws for such State or any part thereof with respect to
     any of the matters enumerated in List II in the Seventh
     Schedule (in  this	 Constitution  referred	 to  as	 the
     "State List").
	  (4) Parliament has power to make laws with respect
     to any  matter for	 any part  of the territory of India
     not included  (in a  State) not with standing that such
     matter is a matter enumerated in the State List."
     A close  and careful  analysis of	these  two  Articles
shows that  the Constitution  strikes a just balance between
the powers  of the Parliament and the State Legislatures but
reserves to  itself the	 right to  legislate in	 exceptional
cases even  in matters	appearing in the State List. This in
fine is	 the logical result and the necessary concomitant sf
cl. (4) of Art. 246.
     It is also not disputed that under s. 2 of the 1975 Act
the entire  tobacco industry  was taken	 over by the Central
Government. Having  thus narrated the admitted facts I would
now proceed  to the  merits of the appeals. To begin with, I
might  indicate	  the  cardinal	 principles  justifying	 the
competency of  the respective  legislatures with  respect to
the entries concerned:-
     (1)  Entries in  each of  the Lists  must be  given the
	  most liberal	and widest  possible  interpretation
	  and no attempt should be made to narrow or whittle
	  down the  scope of  the entries.  This is  a	well
	  settled principle  of law  and was reiterated in a
	  recent decision  of this  Court in  S.P. Mittal v.
	  Union of  India Ors.(l)  where this Court observed
	  thus:-
     (1) [1983]1 S.C.R. 51.
169
	  "It may be pointed out at the very outset that the
     A function	 of the	 Lists is not to confer powers. They
     merely demarcate the legislative fields. The entries in
     the three Lists are only legislative heads or fields or
     legislation and  the power	 to legislate  is  given  to
     appropriate legislature  by Articles  245 and  248 (sic
     246) of the Constitution.
     (2) The  application of  the  doctrine  o	f  pith	 and
substance  really  means  that	where  a  legislation  falls
entirely within	 the scope of an entry within the competence
of a State legislature then this doctrine will apply and the
Act will  not be  struck down,	the  doctrine  of  pith	 and
substance has  been summarised	in the	case of	 Delhi Cloth
General Mills  Co. Ltd.	 v. Union  of India  & Ors.(1) where
Desai,	J.   speaking  for  the	 Court	made  the  following
observations:
	  "To  resolve	 the  controversy   if	it   becomes
     necessary to  ascertain to	 which entry  in  the  three
     Lists, the	 legislation is	 referable,  the  Court	 has
     evolved the  doctrine of pith and substance. If in pith
     and substance,  the legislation  falls within one entry
     or the  other but some portion of the subject-matter of
     the legislation  incidentally trenches  upon and  might
     enter a  field under another List, then it must be held
     to be  valid in  its entirety,  even  though  it  might
     incidentally trench  on matters  which are	 beyond	 its
     competence."
     (3) The  consideration of	encroachment or entrenchment
of one	List in	 another and the extent thereof is also well
established. If	 the entrenchment  is minimal  and does	 not
affect the  dominant part  of some other entry, which is not
within the  competence of the State Legislature, the Act may
be upheld as constitutionally valid.
     (4) The  nature and  character  of	 the  scope  of	 the
entries having	regard to  the touch stone of the provisions
of Arts. 245 and 246.
     (5) The doctrine of occupied field has a great place in
the  interpretation  as	 to  whether  or  not  a  particular
legislature is competent to legislate on a particular entry.
This means  that when  the field  is completely	 occupied by
List I, as in this case, then the State
     (1) [1931] 4 S.C.C. 167.
170
legislature  is	 wholly	 incompetent  to  legislate  and  no
entrenchment or	 A encroachment,  minimal or otherwise, by a
State legislature  is permitted.  In other  words, where the
field  is   not	 wholly	  occupied,  than   a  mere  minimal
encroachment would  not affect	the validity  of  the  State
legislation.
     Thus, in  my opinion,  the five  principles have  to be
read and  construed  together  and  not	 in  isolation-where
however, the  Central and  the State  legislation cover	 the
same field then the central legislation would prevail. it is
also well  settled that	 where two  Acts, one  passed by the
Parliament and the other by a State legislature, collide and
there is  no question  of harmonising them, then the Central
legislation must prevail.
     There may also be cases where despite an entry being in
List II,  the Parliament  may under  the provisions  of Art.
246(3) take over that particular field and legislate on that
subject which will debar the late legislative from adding or
passing any such legislation which has been taken over under
Act. 246(3).
     Now to  the authorities.  As  far	back  as  1941,	 the
Federal Court,	while interpreting  the ideal  provisions of
the Government of India Act of 1935 in Subrahmanyan Chettiar
v. Muttuswami Goundan( observed thus.
	  "In [1921]  2 A.C.  91, Lord Haldane after stating
     'the rule	of exception' applicable to the heads of ss.
     91 and 92, added:
	    Neither   the  Parliament	of  Canada  nor	 the
     Provincial Legislature  have authority under the Act to
     nullify,  by   implication	 any  more  then  expressly,
     statutes which they could not enact.
     ...
	  While the  Federal Legislature  is given power, it
     is expressly  provided that  "a Provincial	 Legislature
     has not  power to	make laws with respect to any of the
     matters  enumerated  in  List  I..	 On  a	very  strict
     interpretation of	s. 100,	 it would necessarily follow
     that from all matters in
     (1) A.l.R. 1941 F.C. 47.
171
     List II  which are	 exclusively assigned  to Provincial
     Legislatures, all	portions, which	 fall in List I or A
     List III  must be excluded. Similarly, from all matters
     falling in	 List III, all portions which fall in List I
     must be  excluded. The section would then mean that the
     Federal Legislature  has full  and exclusive  power  to
     legislate with  respect to	 matters in  List I, and has
     also power	 to legis-  late with  respect to matters in
     List III.	A Provincial Legislature has exclusive power
     to legislate  with respect	 to List  II, minus  matters
     falling in List I, or List III; has concurrent power to
     legislate with  respect to	 matters in  List III, minus
     matters falling in List I. In its fullest scope, S. 100
     would then	 mean that  if it  happens that there is any
     subject in	 List II  which also falls in List I or List
     III, it  must be  taken as	 cut out from List II.. If a
     subject falls exclusively in List 11 and no other list,
     then  the	power  of  the	Provincial  Legislatures  is
     supreme. But  it does also fall with in List I, then it
     must be  deemed as	 if it is not included in List II at
     all. Similarly,  if it  also falls in List III, it must
     be deemed	to have	 been excluded	from List II But the
     rigour of	the literal interpretation is relaxed by the
     use of  the words	"with respect  to" which  as already
     pointed out  only signify	"path and substance," and do
     not forbid a mere incidental encroachment. But, even if
     such  an  incidental  encroachment	 may  be  ordinarily
     permissible, the  field may  not be clear. There may be
     competency and yet repugnancy also. The question is how
     to prevent	 a clash  if the  trespass  is	on  a  field
     already occupied by a Central Legislation."
     In the above case their Lordships relied on the leading
case reported  in [1921] 2 A. C. 91. To the same effect is a
decision of this Court in Zaverbhai Amaidas v. State Bank of
Bombay(l) where the following observations were made:
	  "The principle  embodied in  section 107  (2)	 and
     article 254  (2) is  that	when  there  is	 legislation
     covering the same ground both by the Central and by the
     Province both  of them  being competent  to  enact	 the
     same, the	la v  of the Centre should prevail over That
     of the State."
     (1) [1955] 1 S.C.R 799.
172
 In Deep  Chand  v.	 State	of  U.P.  &  Ors.  (1)	same
principles of  repugnancy have been reiterated and the three
principles laid	 down by  Nicholas were	 fully	approved  by
Subba Rao, J. thus:
	  "Nicholas  in	 his  Australian  Constitution,	 2nd
     Edition,  page   303,  refers   to	  three	  tests	  of
     inconsistency or repugnancy
     "(1) There may  be inconsistency in the actual terms of
	  the competing statutes;
     (2)  Though there	may be	no direct  conflict, a State
	  law may  be inoperative  because the	Commonwealth
	  law, or  the award  of the  Commonwealth Court, is
	  intended to be complete exhaustive code; and
     (3)  Even in  the absence	of intention, a conflict may
	  arise when  both State  and Commonwealth  seek  to
	  exercise  their   powers  over  the  same  subject
	  matter."
	  Repugnancy  between	two  statutes  may  thus  be
     ascertained  on   the  bases  of  the  following  three
     principles:
     (1)  Whether there	 is direct  conflict between the two
	  provisions;
     (2)  Whether  Parliament	intended  to   lay  down  an
	  exhaustive code  in respect  of the subject matter
	  replacing the Act of the State Legislature, and
     (3)  Whether the  law made	 by Parliament	and the	 law
	  made by  the State  Legislature  occupy  the	same
	  field."
 In The Calcutta Gas Company (Proprietary) Ltd. v. State
of West	 Bengal &  Ors.(2) the	same view seems to have been
taken where the following observations were made:
     (1) [1959] Supp. 2 S.C.R. 8.
     (2) [19621 Supp. 3 S.C.R. 1.
173
	  "It may,  therefore, be  taken as  a well  settled
     rule of  construction that every attempt should be made
     to harmonize the apparently convicting entries not only
     of different  Lists but  also of  the same	 List and to
     reject that  construction which  will rob	one  of	 the
     entries of its entire centre and make it nugatory."
					     (Emphasis ours)
     Thus, indeed  if I accept the agrument of the Karnataka
Government, which  seems to  have found	 favour with Brother
Mukharji, J.  I would  really be robbing the 1975 Act of its
entire content	and essential  import by  handing  over	 the
power of  legislation to  the State  Government which per se
has been  taken over  by Parliament  under Art.	 246 by	 the
1975, Act.
     The case  of State	 of Orissa  v. M.A. Tulloch & Co.(l)
appears to  be a  direct authority on the question at issue,
viz., if  the Central  Act and	the State  Act	collide	 the
inevitable consequence would have to be that the Central Act
will prevail  over the State Act and the latter will have to
yield. In this connection, this Court observed thus:
	  "Repugnancy  arises	when  two  enanctments	both
     within the	 competence of	the two Legislatures collide
     and when  the Constitution	 expressly or  by  necessary
     implication  provides   that  the	 enanctment  of	 one
     Legislature has   superiority  over the  other then to
     the extent	 of the	 repugnancy the	 one supersedes	 the
     other..  The   best  of   two  legislation	  containing
     contradictory provisions  is  not,	 however,  the	only
     criterion of repugnancy, for if a competent legislature
     with a superior efficacy expressly or impliedly evinces
     by its  legislation an  intention to  cover  the  whole
     filed, the	 enactments of the other legislature whether
     passed before or after would be overborne on the ground
     of repugnance."
					 (Emphasis supplied)
     To the same effect is another decision Or this Court in
Sudhir Chandra	Nawn  v.  Wealth  Tax  Officer,	 Calcutta  &
Ors.(2) when Shah, J. Observed thus:
	  "Exclusive  power   to  legislate  conferred	upon
     Parliament is  exercisable, not  with standing anything
     contained
     (1) [1964] 4 S.C.R. 461.
     (2) [1969] 1 S.C.R. 108.
174
     in cls.  (2) &  (3), that	is  made  more	emphatic  by
     providing A  in cl.  (3) that  the Legislature  of	 any
     State has	exclusive power	 to make laws for such State
     or any  part thereof with respect to any of the matters
     enumerated in  List II  in the  Seventh  Schedule,	 but
     subject to	 cls. (1)  and (2).  Exclusive power  of the
     State Legislature has therefore to be exercised subject
     to cl.  (1)  i.  e.,  the	exclusive  power  which	 the
     Parliament has  in respect of the matters enumerated in
     List I. Assuming that there is a conflict between entry
     86 List I and entry 49 List II, which is not capable of
     reconciliation, the power of Parliament to legislate in
     respect of	 a matter  which is exclusively entrusted to
     it must  supersede pro  tanto the	exercise of power of
     the State Legislatere."
					 (Emphasis supplied)
     Practically the  same view	 has been  taken in Baijnath
Kedia v.  State of  Bihar  &  Ors.(1)  where  the  following
observations were made :-
	  "It is  open to  Parliament to  declare that it is
     expedient in  the	public	interest  that	the  control
     should rest  in Central Government. To what extent such
     a declaration can go is for Parliament to determine and
     this must	be commensurate	 with public  interest. Once
     this declaration  is made and the extent laid down, the
     subject of	 legislation to the extent laid down becomes
     an exclusive subject for legislation by Parliament. Any
     legislation by  the State	after such  declaration	 and
     trenching upon  the field	disclosed in the declaration
     must necessarily be unconstitutional because that filed
     is abstracted  from the  legislative competence  Or the
     State  Legislature.  This	proposition  is	 also  self-
     evident that  no attempt was rightly made to contradict
     it."
					 (Emphasis supplied)
     Thus, it  would appear  that  in  view  of	 the  recent
decisions, once	 the Centre  takes over	 an  industry  under
entry No.  52 of  List I  and passes  an Act to regulate the
legislation,  the  State  legislature  ceases  to  have	 any
jurisdiction to legislate in that field and if it does
(1) [1970] 2 S.C.R. 100,
175
so, that  legislation would  be ultra vires of the powers of
the State legislature.
     I might  mention  here  a	reference  made	 by  Brother
Mukharji J. to the fact that the Karnataka State Legislature
passed an  Act of  1980 by  which the  Tobacco Industry	 was
taken within  its ambit but, the assent of the President was
not taken  as required	by Article 254 (2). This takes us no
where because  in the  first place  as	the  assent  of	 the
President was  not taken,  the Karnataka  Act  of  1980	 was
wholly incompetent.  Moreover even if the President's assent
would have  been taken	it would  not validate the Karnataka
Act of	1980 so	 far as	 the Tobacco  Industry is  concerned
because Article	 254(2) applies only to matters contained in
the Concurrent	List and  has nothing  to  do  with  matters
enumerated in  List I or List II. Thus, the Karnataka Act of
1980 would  have absolutely  no application  to entry  52 of
List I	which was  fully occupied by the Central Act of 1975
as referred to above. This circumstance, therefore, is of no
consequence.
     On a careful consideration, therefore, of the facts and
circumstances of  this case  I express my respectful dissent
with the  view taken  by Brother Mukbarji, J., on this point
and hold that so far as the case of the I.T.C. (C.A. No. 629
of 1983)  is concerned,	 the Government	 of Karnataka had no
jurisdiction to	 levy any  market fee  because that directly
collides with the 1975 Act as indicated above.
     This being the position, 1, therefore, strike down that
part of the Karnataka Act which takes in itself the power to
levy market  fee on  tobacco or	 its products.	Even if	 the
products may  be sold  in the p markets in Karnataka or near
about the  same place  situated in  the State,	the power to
levy fees will not belong to that State: it will remain with
Centre	which  would  regulate	the  sale  and	purchase  of
tobacco. It may be reiterated at the risk of repetition than
an application	for registration  with the Tobacco Board was
made  by   the	Karnataka  Government  which  was,  however,
rejected by  the  Board.  This	indirectly  shows  that	 the
Government of Karnataka was aware that it could not encroach
on the	 field which  was fully	 occupied by  tho Centre  by
virtue of the 1975 Act.
     Before closing  the judgment  I would  like to  give  a
rough and  ready example  to  illustrate  my  constitutional
point of  view in  t figurative sense. Suppose there are two
fields belonging to A and B.
176
The area  of A's  field is  500x200 metres. There is another
adjacent A field belonging to comprising 400xl00 metres. A's
possession covers  every nook and corner of the entire field
leaving nothing	 vacant. It is manifest that cannot encroach
or entrench  on the  field of  A. Conversely,  if  A  is  in
possession of  the entire  field leaving,  however, a  small
portion	 (30x20)   metres  vacant,  would  be  justified  in
encroaching on	that particular	 part of  the vacant  field.
This is	 how we	 have to  construe  the	 provisions  of	 the
Central	 and  State  entries  in  List	I  and	List  II  in
accordance with	 the provisions	 of Arts. 245 and 246 of the
Constitution.
     Having regard to these circumstances I allow the appeal
of the I.T.C.. (C.A. No. 629 of 1983) and quesh the order of
the Market  Committees of  Karnataka levying  fee on tobacco
and its	 products. To this extent, therefore, I dissent from
the view  taken by  Brother Mukharji, J. for whom I have the
greatest respect.  There will,	however, be  no order  as to
costs and  any fee realised will not be refunded and it will
be for	the Centre  and the State to adjust and work out the
equities of adjustment.
     VARADARAJAN,  J.	The  Mysore   Agricultural   Produce
Marketing (Regulation)	Act. 1966  came into  force on	1-5-
1968.  Now  known  as  the  Karnataka  Agricultural  Produce
Marketing (Regulation)	Act, 1966  it  will  be	 hereinafter
referred to  as 'the  Act'.  S.	 65(1)	of  the	 Act  as  it
originally stood  directed Market Committees in the State to
levy and  collect market  fee  from  buyers  in	 respect  of
specified agricultural produce at rate which may not be more
than thirty paise per one hundred rupees of the price of the
agricultural produce in such manner and at such times as may
be specified.  Clause (2)  of S.  65  stated  that  for	 the
purpose of  clause (1)	all  notified  agricultural  produce
leaving a  yard shall,	unless the  contrary  is  proved  be
presumed to  have been	brought	 within	 such  yard  by	 the
persons in possession of such produce. Pursuant to S. 65 {1)
the market  fee appears to have been fixed by all the market
committees in the State of Karnataka at thirty paise per one
hundred rupees of the price paid to the buyers.
     S. 2  of the  Karnataka Agricultural  Produce Marketing
(Regulation) Amendment Act. 20 of 1973 which came into force
on 23-10-1973  amended S.  65 of the Act by substituting the
words "thirty paise". in sub-section (1) of S. 65 of the Act
by the	words "one  rupee". That Amendment Act was passed in
replacement of
177
the Karnataka Ordinance 5 of 1973 which was repealed by S. 4
of that	 Act with  the necessary saving clause by way of the
proviso. The market Committees accordingly raised the market
fee to	the maximum  limit of one per cent of the sale price
by amendment  of the  byelaws. The enhancement of the market
fee from thirty paise to one rupee per one hundred rupees of
the price paid to buyers was upheld by the High Court in the
decision rendered  on 17.12.1974  in W.	 P- No.	 537 of 1974
(Vaman Rao v. Agricultural Produce market Committee, Sagar).
Subsequently the  Act was  further amended  by the Karnataka
Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) Amendment Act 24
of 1975	 which came  into force	 on 19.5.1975.	S 2  of that
Amendment Act  substituted S.65 of the Act by a new section,
which read:
	  "65. Levy of market fees-
	  (1) The  market committee  shall levy	 and collect
     market  fees   from  every	  seller   in	respect	  of
     agricultural produce  sold by such seller in the market
     at the  rate of  one rupee	 per hundred  rupees of	 the
     price of such produce sold;
	  (2) The  Market Committee  shall levy	 and collect
     market fees from every buyer in respect of agricultural
     produce bought  by such buyer in the market area as may
     be specified  in the  bye-laws (which shall not be more
     than one  rupee per  one hundred rupees of such produce
     bought) in	 such manner  and at  such times  as may  be
     specified in the bye-laws;
	  (3) Every  Market Committee  shall notwithstanding
     anything contained in this Act, credit to the Karnataka
     Roads and Bridges Fund. constituted under the Karnataka
     Motor Vehicles  Taxation Act,  1957.  the	market	fees
     collected under sub-section (1) for being spent for the
     the purpose  of construction,  repairs improvement	 and
     maintenance of rural roads in the State."
     This amendment  provided for the levy and collection of
market fees  by market	committees on and from the seller of
specified agricultural	produce sold  in the  market area at
one rupee  per one  hundred rupees  of	the  price  of	such
produce sold and for crediting
178
the market  fees so  collected to the Roads and Bridges Fund
constituted under the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation Act,
1957  for   being  spent   for	the   construction,  repair,
improvement and maintenance of rural roads in the State.
     The  levy	of  market  fees  on  sellers  of  specified
agricultural produce by the amendment of S 65 of the Act and
the appropriation  of the  market fee  collected under	that
sub-section from  sellers to  the credit  of the  Roads	 and
Bridges	 Fund	under  sub-section  (3)	 was  challenged  in
Rajasekhriah's case(1)	In that	 case the  High Court struck
down the  amended s. 65(1) and (3) of the Act and upheld the
levy on	 buyers under  S.65 (2)	 of the	 Act in the judgment
delivered  on	28.9.1978  following   the  decision   dated
17.12.1974 rendred in Vaman Rao's case (supra) so for as the
lavy in buyers is concerned.
     On	 30   6.1968  Karnataka	 Ordinance  2  of  1979	 was
promulgated making  some amendments  to ss. 63 and 65 of the
Act. S.	 63 which deals with the powers and duties of market
Committees  was	  amended  with	 retrospective	effect	from
19.5.1975 so  as to substitute in clause (ii) of sub-section
(1) of	S.63 the  words "transport  and marketing"  for	 the
word,  marketing"   In	Sub-section   (2)(a)  of  S.63	with
reference to  the duties, of the Marketing Committees, after
item (1) the amendment stated:
	  "provide either  independently or  along with some
     other authority  necessary facilities for the transport
     of notified  agricultural produce	to the	yard in such
     manner as may be prescribed."
     S.65 was ammended (i) validating market fees levied and
collected under sub-section (1) of S. 65 for the period from
19.5.1975 to  28.9.1978;  (ii)	omitting  the  amended	sub-
section (1)  of S.  65 with  effect  from  28.9.1978;  (iii)
enhancing the maximum permissible limit of market fee levied
and collected  from buyers of specified agricultural produce
under sub-section  (2) of S. 65 from one per cent to two per
cent, and  (iv) omitting  sub-section (3)  of S. 65 as if it
never existed in the Statute.
     The    Karnataka	 Agriculture	Produce	   Marketing
(Regulation) Amendment	Act 17 of 1980 which came into force
on 9.5.1980 seems
     (1) I.L.R. [1978] Karnataka 1939,
179
to have	 been passed  in replacement of Ordinance 16 of 1979
which in  turn was promulgated in replacement of Ordinance 2
of 1979.  S. A	42 of that Amendment Act validating the levy
and  collection	  of  market  fee  during  the	period	from
19.5.1975  to	28.9.1978   which   was	  struck   down	  in
Rajasekhariah's case (supra) reads:
	  "42.Validati on  of levy  of market  fee  etc.-(1)
     Not- withstanding	anything contained  in	any  decree,
     order or  judgment of any court, or other authority any
     levy or  collection of  market fee made or purported to
     have been	made, any  action taken	 or  thing  done  in
     relation  to   such  levy	 or  collection	  under	 the
     provisions of the principal Act before the commencement
     of this  section shall  be deemed	to be  as valid	 and
     effective as  if such  levy or  collection or action or
     thing had	been made, taken or done under the principal
     Act as amended by this Act and accordingly-
	  (a) all acts, proceedings or things done or action
     taken by  any market  committee in	 connection with the
     levy and  collection of  such market fee shall, for all
     purposes be  deemed to  be or to have always been made,
     done or taken in accordance with law;
	  (b)  no   suit  or   other  proceedings  shall  be
     maintained E  or continued	 in any	 court or before any
     authority for the refund to any such market fee; and
	  (c) no  court shall  enforce any  decree or  order
     directing the refund of any such fee.
	  (2)  (a)   The  Karnataka   Agricultural   Produce
     Marketing (Regulation)  (Second  Amendment)  Ordinance,
     1979 (Karnataka  Ordinance No  16 of  1979)  is  hereby
     repealed.
	  (b) Notwithstanding  such repeal, any action taken
     or any  appointment, notification, order, scheme, rule,
     form or bye-law made or issued from deemed to have been
     taken, made  or issued under the Karnataka Agricultural
     Produce Marketing	(Regulation)( Amendment)  Ordinance,
     1979 shall be deemed to have been taken, made or issued
     under this	 Act as	 if this  Act were  in force  at all
     relevant times  and any  reference therein	 to the said
     Ordinance
180
     shall be  deemed to be a reference to this Act and they
     A shall  continue in force accordingly unless and until
     superseded by  any action	taken  or  any	appointment,
     notification, order, scheme, rule, form or bye-law made
     or issued under this Act or any other law."
 Section 20 of the Amendment Act 17 of 1980 amended S.65
of the Act thus -
	  "In S.65 of Principal Act, (1) for sub-section (1)
     the following  sub-section shall be deemed to have been
     substituted with  effect from  19th  day  of  May	1975
     namely:-
	  (1) In respect of agricultural produce sold in the
     market area  there shall be levied and collected by the
     Market Committee thereof, from every seller market fees
     at the rate of one per cent of the sale proceeds of the
     produce so sold;
	  (2) Sub-section (1) as so substituted shall be and
     shall deemed  to have been omitted with effect from the
     29th day of September, 1978;
	  (3) In  Sub-section (2)  for the words "one rupee"
     the words "two rupees" shall be substituted;
	  (4) Sub-section  (3) shall  and  shall  be  deemed
     always to have been omitted."
     Thus the levy of market fee subject to a maximum of one
per cent of the sale price of specified agricultural produce
on sellers  for the period from 19.5.1975 has been done away
with effect  from 28.9.1978  and sub-section  (3) of  s.  65
which provided	for crediting  the  market  fee	 levied	 and
collected from	sellers of specified agricultural produce to
the Roads  and Bridges	Fund has been omitted as if it never
existed in S. 65 of the Act by the Amendment Act 17 of 1980.
     Pursuant to the amendment made to sub-section (2) of S.
65 of the Act enhancing the maximum limit of the market fees
leviable on  buyers under  the station	from one per cent to
two per cent, all the
181
Market Committees  in the  State  of  Karnataka	 except	 the
Mangalore  Market   Committee  amended	 the  bye-laws	 for
enhancing the levy A under s. 65 (2) of the Act from one per
cent to two per cent.
     The traders  filed writ  petitions in  the	 High  Court
challenging the enhancement of the levy from one per cent to
two per	 cent as  well as  the collection  of the market fee
from sellers  during the period from 19.5.1975 to 28.9.1978.
After the  hearing of  the writ	 petitions commenced  in the
High Court  in October-November, 1981, Ordinance of 1981 was
promulgated dispensing	with the requirement of the previous
publication contemplated in S. 148 of the Act in relation to
making of bye-laws and amendments thereof with retrospective
effect. After  the High	 Court delivered the judgment in the
Writ Petitions on 25.1.1982 upholding the enhancement of the
market fee  on buyers  from one	 per cent to two percent the
market fee  leviable under  S. 65  (2) on  buyers  has	been
reduced by  all the  Market Committees	by the	Circular No.
SMD-268/PGN-83 dated  27.2.1982 to  one per cent pursuant to
the declaration of the policy of the Government.
     The principal  challenge before  the High	Court was as
to: (i) the constitutional validity of Sec 65 (1) of the Act
as substituted	by the Amendment Act 17 of 1980 which sought
to validate  the levy  and collection  of market  fees	from
sellers of  specified agricultural produce during the period
of  its	 operation  between  19.5.1975	when  S.  65(1)	 was
introduced in  the place of the old S. 65 by sub-section (2)
of the	Amendment Act 24 of 1975 and when it was struck down
by the	High Court  in Rajasekhariah's	case  (supra);	(ii)
enhancement of	the market  fee from one per cent to two per
cent of	 the price  of the specified agricultural produce by
amendment of  the bye-law  pursuant to	the raising  of	 the
maximum limit  from one	 per cent  to two  per cent  by	 the
Amendment Act  17 of  1980 on  two grounds,  namely, want of
sufficient quid	 pro quo and violation of the requirement of
prior publication  and subsequent  sanction of the amendment
to the	bye-law by  the Chief Marketing Officer contemplated
in S.  148 of  the Act, and (iii) inclusion of certain items
of agricultural	 produce such as cardamom and tobacco in the
schedule to  the Act. The levy and collection of market fees
from sellers  during the  period from 19.5.1975 to 28.9.1978
was sought  to	be  validated  by  the	aforesaid  amendment
because by  reason of  the judgment  of the  High  Court  in
Rajasekhariah's case  (supra) the  State was  exposed to the
liability to  refund the  market fees  collected during that
period. The  High Court	 found that S. 65 (1) as substituted
by the Amendment Act 17
182
of 1980	 and even  S. 42  of  that  Amendment  Act  was	 not
constitutionally valid and are liable to be struck down. The
reason is that before S. 65 (3) was struck down the levy and
collection of market fees under S. 65 (1), as it stood then,
were for the benefit of the Karnataka Roads and Bridges Fund
constituted under the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation Act,
1957 and that the event which had happened, namely crediting
of the	market fees  to that  Fund cannot be reversed by the
subsequent amendment of S. 65 (1) and the introduction of S.
42 in  the Amendment Act 17 of 1980. The High Court rejected
the submission	of the learned Advocate General that several
crores of  rupees collected under S. 65 (1) from sellers had
actually  been	spent  for  the	 construction,	improvement,
repair and  maintenance of rural roads, culverts and bridges
and therefore,	the Government	was obliged to have recourse
to the	amendment  and	also  to  introduce  S.	 42  in	 the
Amendment Act  17 of  1980 as not acceptable, and relying on
the decision  of this  Court in Kewal Krishan Puri's case(l)
the High  Court held  that rural  roads	 are  primarily	 and
essentially intended  for the  benefit of the public and the
class of  market fee  payers are,  as part  of	the  general
public, entitled  to benefit  of their	user and  the market
fees cannot  be levied	on and	collected from them for that
purpose,  more	so  because  the  rural	 roads	constructed,
improved, repaired  and	 maintained  with  the	market	fees
collected  did	 not  become  the  property  of	 the  market
committees or  shed their  character as	 public roads.	This
appears to  be the  main reason	 for the High Court striking
down S.	 65 (1) as substituted by S. 20 of the Amendment Act
17 of  1980 and	 also the validating S. 42 of that Amendment
Act.
     As regards	 S. 65 (2) relating to market fees on buyers
the High  Court rejected the contention that the sub-section
confers uncanalised and excessive power on market committees
in the	matter of  fixing the  rate of	market fees and held
that there are adequate statutory guidelines and safeguards.
     On the  question of  the validity	of the	bye-law	 for
enhancing the  market fees from one per cent to two per cent
the High  Court found  that after  the	maximum	 permissible
limit of  the market  fee was  raised under S. 65 (1) by the
Amendment Act  17 of  1980 from one per cent to two per cent
from  19.1.1980	  the	Chief	Marketing   Officer   issued
instructions to the market committees for amending
	 (1) [1973] 3 S.C.R. 1217.
183
the bye-laws  in order	to raise the market fee from one per
cent to	 two per  cent and  he	subseqently  sanctioned	 the
enhancement after A the bye-laws were accordingly amended by
the market committees.
     The learned  counsel for  the petitioners	invited	 the
attention  of  the  High  Court	 to  the  following  passage
occurring at  page 952	of volume  24 of  Halsbury's Laws of
England, Third Edition: B
	  "The bye-law	to  be	valid  must  be	 reasonable.
     Unless it	is manifestly unjust, capricious, or partial
     in the  operation or  involves  oppressive,  gratuitous
     inferences with  the rights  of those subject to it the
     question of  its reasonableness is one to be decided by
     the authority making it."
     It was  contended before  the High	 Court that the very
process by  which the amendment to the bye-law for enhancing
the market fee from one per cent to two per cent was made is
without any application of the mind of the market committees
to the relevant criteria and it should, therefore, be struck
down on	 that ground. It was contended that the amendment of
S.  65	 (2)  providing	  for  enhancement  of	the  maximum
permissible limit of the market fee from one per cent to two
per cent became effective from 30.6.1979 and that the Market
Committees lost	 no time  in mechanically raising the market
fee  from   one	 per  cent  to	two  per  cent	without	 any
application  of	 the  mind  to	the  question  whether	such
enhancement was	 justified having  regard to  the  financial
resources available  and the  funds  required  to  meet	 the
outlay on  the services	 proposed to be provided in the near
future	and  without  preparing	 any  budget  estimates	 and
balance sheet  and considering them before deciding upon the
quantum of  enhancement and without giving an opportunity of
being heard  about the	matter to the affected interests. On
the other  hand, for  the Market Committees it was contended
that the  right to  be heard was a creature of S. 148 (1) of
the Act	 and not  in recognition  of  or  corollary  to	 any
obligation which  could be said to be inherent in or implied
from S.	 65 (2)	 and that  what was given by the Statute was
taken away by the Stature and the Court not go against it.
     It was  also contended  for the writ petitioners before
the High Court that in S. 148 as it originally stood then it
was provided  that subject  to the provisions of the Act and
the Rules  made under  S. 146 and with the previous sanction
of the Chief Marketing Officer a
184
Market Committee  may, after  previous	publication  in	 the
prescribed A manner, make bye-laws for the regulation of the
business and  the conditions  of trading  in the market area
and that  every bye-law	 made under  that section  shall  be
published in the prescribed manner. The question of increase
in the	rate of the market fee would perhaps fall under item
XXXIII of S. 148 (2) which reads as:
	  "Any other  matter in respect of which by-laws are
     required to be made or may be made under the Act."
It was	submitted before  the High  Court that	there was no
compliance with	 the requirement  of previous  sanction	 add
previous publication  in the  prescribed manner in regard to
the amendment  of the  bye-law for  enhancing  the  rate  of
market fee leviable under s. 65 (2) from one per cent to two
per cent.  The High  Court has	observed that  there was  no
answer to  that criticism  in regard  to the validity of the
amendment to the bye-law for raising the market fee from one
per cent  to two per cent and therefore the State Government
promulgated Ordinance  22 of  1981 when arguments before the
High Court  were coming	 to a  close amending S. 148 as also
ss. 134 and 158 of the act. The amendment introduced by that
Ordinance omitted  the words  "after previous publication in
the prescribed	manner" which  occurred in  S.148 of the Act
with retrospective  effect from	 the date of commencement of
the Act.  Sec. 3  of  the  amending  Ordinance	22  of	1981
validated the  bye-law notwithstanding	the  fact  that	 the
affected interest  were not  heard in  any manner.  The High
Court  has  observed  that  this  amendment  took  away	 the
obligation of prior hearing of the affected interests on the
ground that  the persons  affected have no right to be heard
before statutory rules or bye-laws are made unless the right
is conferred  by the  Statute and  that the  right has	been
taken away  by ss.  3 and  5 of the amending Ordinance 22 of
1981. The  High Court  found that  in this  case  the  Chief
marketing Officer  himself  has	 issued	 directions  to	 the
market Committees  to amend  the bye-laws  for enhancing the
market fee  from one  per cent	to two per cent and the bye-
laws were  accordingly amended	by the market committees and
the Chief  Marketing Officer  thereafter accorded  sanction.
The High  Court has  held that the Chief marketing Officer's
direction can  be regarded  as	his  previous  sanction	 for
amending the bye-laws.
185
     However, the learned Judges themselves do not appear to
have been quite happy about what had happened, for they have
observed A para 61 of their judgment thus:
	       "The  question might,  however, become a live
     issue if  the Market  Committees were to amend the bye-
     laws made	under s.  65(2) of the Act in future without
     such an opportunity of hearing effected interests."
     Even the  learned Advocate	 General appearing  for	 the
State and  the learned	Counsel	 appearing  for	 the  market
Committees stated before the High Court, though according to
them no	 obligation of	hearing the  affected interests	 was
implicit in  s. 65(2),	that it would be eminently desirable
that the  Market Committees  adopt some reasonable procedure
in that	 behalf and that the amendment to s. 148 made by the
Ordinance was only intended to cure the defect in making the
impugned bye-laws and avoid great public inconvenience which
may result  from the  invalidation of  the bye-laws and that
there was  no intention	 to make  the deletion	a  permanent
feature. They  submitted that any reasonable procedure which
may be	suggested by  the High	Court would  be	 adopted  in
practice even if there was no such legal compulsion. In view
of that	 request by the learned Advocate General and learned
Counsel for the Market Committee the High Court has observed
in its judgment thus:
	    "It appears to us that before a Market Committee
     proposes to  amend a bye-law to make an upward revision
     of the  rate of  fee, in  future, the Market Committees
     must, first  follow the directions of the Supreme Court
     at para  55 in  KEWAL KRISHAN  PURI'S case	 (supra). It
     would also	 be proper  for the  Market   to  prepare  a
     statement containing the particulars of the development
     works and services intended to be undertaken out of the
     market  fee  receipts  together  with  cost-projections
     thereof,  also   setting  out   the  likely  period  of
     execution.	 The  plans  and  estimates  for  all  civil
     engineering works	should be prepared and sanctioned as
     prescribed in Rules 70 and 71 of the Rules framed under
     the Act.  Then the	 Market Committees should notify the
     proposals calling	for objections	and suggestions from
     the affected interests with in a stipulated period, not
     being  less  then	one  month.  The  mode	of  inviting
     objections and suggestions may be,
186
     in addition  to the  publication on the Notice Board of
     the  A   Market  Committee's   Office,  by	 appropriate
     publication in  a daily  news-paper, having circulation
     in the area. Those who wish to file objections or offer
     suggestions shall	be entitled  to	 inspection  of	 the
     statements containing  the estimates,  costs and  other
     financial projections. The Market-Committees shall take
     into consideration	 the objections	 and suggestions  so
     offered and  here the interest affected before amending
     the bye-laws  revising the	 fee. This appears to be the
     minimal requirement  of  a	 hearing  of  the  interests
     affected. The Market-Committees shall, of course, be at
     liberty to	 adopt a  more comprehensive  procedure. The
     C.M.O.  should   also  look  into	the  objections	 and
     suggestions before	 according his sanction. All that we
     need say  at this	stage is  that following  of such  a
     procedure would  help the	market committees  to render
     better and	 efficient service,  and the bye-laws framed
     after  following  such  a	procedure  would  be  beyond
     reproach on  procedural grounds, obviating needless and
     avoidable litigation."
     Point No.	12 framed  in para  7 of the judgment of the
High Court  relates to	the question  of  justification	 for
enhancement of	the market fee payable under s. 65(2) of the
Act from one per cent to two per cent and roads thus:
	    "Whether the enhancement of market fees leviable
     under s.  65(2) of the Act from one per cent to two per
     cent brought  about by amendment of the bye-laws of the
     Market Committees in unsupportable in law and fails for
     want of correlation with the value of services rendered
     to the payers of the fees."
The High Court has observed:
	  "In 1974  when the  levy had come to be challenged
     in	 Vaman	 Rao's	case,  (supra)	the  several  market
     committees had  filed financial  projections for  a I S
     year period  ll from  1974-75  to	show  the  estimated
     income and	 expenditure. Just  about that	time all the
     market committees	had occasion  to prepare and furnish
     similar financial	proposals  to  the  Chief  Marketing
     Officer in connection
187
     with certain  proposals for development with the aid of
     a loan from the World Bank. As learned counsel wanted A
     the Court to examine these proposals also having regard
     to the  principles and  guide lines  laid down  by	 the
     Supreme Court  in Kewa1 Krishan Puri's case (supra). we
     directed by  over order  dated  30.11.1981,  the  Chief
     Marketing	Officer	  to  furnish  in  respect  of	each
     respondent Market	Committee, a comprehensive statement
     in a  tabular from,  setting out  the following amongst
     other particulars:
     1.	  The year of establishment of the Market-Committee.
     2.	  Amount actually spent for capital or developmental
	  works from the beginning till 30.6:1974.
     3.	  The particulars  (in metric  tonnes) of  the total
	  annual  arrivals   of	 all  notified	agricultural
	  commodities for  the three  years 1978-79, 1979-80
	  and 1980-81.
     4.	  Average daily	 arrivals (in metric tonnes) for the
	  years 1978-79, 1979-80 and 1980-81.
     5.	  Total amount of market-fee collected for the years
	  1978-79, 1979-80 and 1980-81.
     6.	  Revenue expenditure  incurred for  the years 1978-
	  79, 1979-80 and 1980-81.
     7.	  Cash on hand or in banks or in the form of invest-
	  ment as on 1-7-1981.
     8.	  Items of  developmental works originally envisaged
	  (for a  period of 15 years during  174-75 to 1988-
	  89)  together	  with	item-vise   estimated	cost
	  thereof;  revised  estimates,	 if  any,  itemwise;
	  progress inexecution in terms of financial outlays
	  of work,  itemwise in	 respect of  each item up to
	  1.7.1981; balance  remaining to  be  executed	 (in
	  terms of money) with break up for the future years
	  upto 1988-89	if  the	 work  to  be  completed  in
	  instalments  in   future;  any   deletion  of	  or
	  alteration in	 the items of work envisaged in 1974
	  75; and  any other  additional developmental works
	  proposed after 1974-75."
188
	  In response  to this	order, the  Chief  Marketing
     Officer  has filed the statements which are at Exhibits
     R-l to  R-111, In	addition, several of the respondent-
     Market Committee have filed statements which though not
     in the same form also contain similar information."
     The petitioners  before the  High Court  made  fourfold
submissions regarding those statements. they are:
     (1) Exs. R-1 to R-l 11 are totally at variance with the
corresponding estimates	 furnished for	the same  period  in
1974-75 and  they have been prepared only in order to supply
an artificial  quid pro	 quo for enhancement of the levy and
are merely  show-pieces on  paper to  get over	the  present
challenge;
     (2) the  vagaries and  disparities in the proportion of
the pro	 posed development of market yard to market yard are
so glaring  that no  authority in  the position of the Chief
Marketing  Officer   would  reasonably	approve	 such  unco-
ordinated and  disproportionate development of the regulated
markets;
     (3) many  of  the	items  of  works  envisaged  in	 the
development such as constructions of shops, godowns and like
are unrelated  to the  concept of  special  service  to	 the
buyers and cannot be reckoned as qualifying for correlation.
If these impermissible items are deleted from the estimates,
the  Market  Committees	 would	not  be	 in  a	position  to
establish the requisite quid pro quo; and
     (4)  a  substantial  part	of  the	 proposed  financial
outlays relates to what are called rural markets the outlays
on which  could not  be reckoned  as for  rendering  special
service to the buyers.
     After considering	the above proposals and estimate and
the arguments advanced at length about them and after taking
into consideration  the proceedings  of the National Seminar
on Rural  Markets  Development	held  in  New  Delhi  during
December 1979  in which	 it is	stated that in Karnataka the
Panchayats manage  the rural markets as agents of the Market
Committees and	75 per	cent of the revenues is given to the
Panchayats for managing the markets and the remaining 25 per
cent is	 taken by  the Market Committees, the High Court has
held that  the outlays on the establishment of rural markets
cannot be  held to  be	impermissible  for  the	 purpose  of
reckoning correlation.
189
The High Court has observed:
	    "Indeed, in the proposals for the development of
     the Market-Committees,  it is  legitimate to  expect  a
     scientific consistency  and  adherence  to	 some  broad
     norms  of	 development.  Under  the  'Act'  the  Chief
     Marketing Officer	is required  to sanction the budgets
     of these Market Committees. Any project for development
     must take	into account,  and be reasonably related to,
     factors such  as the  quantum of  notified agricultural
     produce handled  annually at  the markets; the increase
     thereof expected  in the  reasonable near	future;	 the
     market-fee and other annual incomes; the potentialities
     for expansion  and the  like. Any	proposals for growth
     and development  are to be scientific, they ought to be
     sensible. In  quite a few cases they prima facie appear
     to be  neither. There  ought  to  be  some	 broad-norms
     reconciling the  actualities and  potentialities of the
     markets  on   the	one   -hand  and  the  ambitions  of
     development of  the Market Committees and the financial
     outlays proposed  thereon on  the other.  The criticism
     that  the	 proposals  for	  development  disclose	  no
     uniformity or consistency with any norms cannot be said
     to be  without justification.  In several cases markets
     with decidedly lesser potentialiaties for expansion and
     handling lesser  quantum than  other markets propose to
     spend sums	 on  development  which	 are  several  times
     higher than those proposed by those other markets.
	       It  is no  doubt true that uniform standards,
     though desirable, may not be practical in all cases and
     the requirement  of a  market which  handles,  say	 ten
     thousand tonnes  of cotton every year might differ very
     widely from those of a market which may handle the same
     tonnage of	 some other notified produce which though in
     terms of  weight may  be equivalent  but  in  terms  of
     volume be	very  much  lesser.  A	market	which  deals
     prodominantly with	 some seasonal	commodities may have
     its own  special problems and requirements. But in some
     cases before  us even  where there	 are similarities in
     the nature	 of the	 produce and in other circumstances,
     the  ambitions   for  development	 are  irreconcilably
     disparate. Even  amongst markets  which  are  similarly
     situate from the point of view
190
     of the  market fee income, quantum of produce handled A
     and transacted; potentialities for expansion and levels
     of development XX already reached, the proposals reveal
     a wide divergence. There is admittedly no uniformity or
     standardisation of	 norms for  growth even	 broadly and
     each Market-Committee  has	 its  own  plans  of  growth
     adhoc.
	  Indeed  the	Indian	Standards   Institution	 has
     standardised   the	  pattern   of	 regulated   markets
     classifying them  into 'A',  'B',	'C',  'D',  and	 'E'
     classes  based   on  the	quantum	 of   the   notified
     agricultural  produce  handled  therein  annually.	 The
     assessment of  the marketing projects in Karnataka made
     by	 experts   of	the   Inter   national	 Development
     Association in  connection with  the World Bank aid for
     development of  the markets  has classified  and graded
     the markets  based on  certain  well  accepted  common-
     criteria. The  cost-projections for  various classes of
     markets are  also made  therein. The  present proposals
     have obviously  not kept  any  of	them  in  view.	 One
     explanation was  that the whole concept of marketing is
     expanding	and   these  precipitious   7  are  not	 now
     apposite. However, the wide divergence in the plans for
     development lends some credence to the criticism of the
     petitioners that the estimates were not taken seriously
     even by the Market-Committees or the C.M.O.
    .....	........	 ...........   ............
    .....	........	 ...........   ............
	  But apart  from such	basic infrastructures  which
     stand  on	 a  different	footing,  the	benefit	  of
     utilitarian projects  relatable to	 and developed	from
     fee resources  must be  available to  the payers of the
     fee for  at least	a considerable	part of	 the  period
     covered by the financial estimates and projections. The
     logic of  some of the Market-Committees in this behalf,
     if pushed	to its	logical	 or  illogical	conclusions,
     would mean	 that the  present generation  of fee-payers
     would pay for services which would only be available to
     the next-generation.  In our opinion levy of fee cannot
     be justified on such wholly prospective services "
191
     After considering	in some	 detail	 the  proposals	 and
estimates on  the  assumption  that  they  are	correct	 the
learned Judges of the High A Court have observed:
	  "The upshot of the above discussion is that though
     we are unable to hold, on the material placed before us
     by the  petitioners, that	the levy  ought to  fail for
     want of  quid pro	quo however,  having regard  to	 the
     infirmities noticed  in the estimates and the financial
     projections of  the proposed developmental works on the
     basis  of	 which	the  enhancement  is  sought  to  be
     justified,	 we   are  also	  unable  to  say  with	 any
     confidence	  and	 without   reservations	  that	 the
     enhancement of  fee, depending  as	 it  does  on  those
     estimates	is   totally  justified.   Some	  time-bound
     directions to  which we  will refere  presently  for  a
     second  look   at	the   estimates	 by   the  statutory
     authorities are required to be issued in this behalf.
	  Indeed, having  regard to  the wide  range of	 the
     apparently	  inexplicable	  disproportions   in	 the
     developmental projects of the various Market-Committees
     both  the	learned	 Advocate-General  and	the  Learned
     counsel for  the Market-Committees,  stated that  there
     was obvious scope-in our opinion an imperative need-for
     some rationalisation  of the  pattern of development of
     market-yards based	 upon and  related to  the  relevant
     factors such  as quantum  and  nature  of	agricultural
     produced handled  by  the	markets;  potentialities  of
     development of the market in reasonably near future and
     the like.	It is  neither possible nor advisable to lay
     down exhaustively	all the	 criteria  that	 may  become
     relevant to  the task.  However, the  need for  such an
     exercise to  regulate the	development to these market-
     yards on  a scientific,  rational and uniform basis was
     accepted by all the parties."
	  A time-bound schedule has to be prescribed for the
     Chief Marketing  Officer, as  the authority  under	 the
     'Act', approving the budgets, to evolve and standardise
     broad  and	 general  norms,  taking  into	account	 the
     observations made in the course of this order, both for
     infra-structural and  developmental works and services,
     on as  uniform a  basis as	 may reasonably be feasible,
     for  the	various	  markets   depending	upon   their
     classification to be made
192
     by the  C.M.O on the basis of such criteria as he A may
     deem relevant  and also  to evolve	 corresponding	cost
     patterns of  the projects with suitable unbuilt indicia
     for escalation  of cost-structures,  from time to time,
     proportional to  the rise	in the	price  of  material.
     These norms  shall operate	 as broad and general guide-
     lines for	the development	 of  regulated	markets	 and
     shall be  kept in	view  of  the  market-committees  in
     planning developmental  projects. Departure  from these
     norms and standards shall, of course, be permissible on
     grounds of special requirements of individual regulated
     markets  depending	  upon	their	specific  individual
     problems and  requirements. At  the time of sanction of
     the budgets  of the Market Committees the C.M.O. should
     scrutinise the  budgets with  reference to and applying
     the broad-norms and criteria evolved and adopted by him
     so that  the programme  and the projects of development
     for the  next 8  years are need based and are as far as
     may be on a uniform and rational basis.
	  The  learned	 Advocate-General  and	the  learned
     counsel for  the Market-Committees	 concede  that	this
     exercise is  necessary and	 beneficial  as	 indeed	 the
     matter involved  an outlay	 of  nearly  145  crores  of
     rupees in the next 8 years on the regulated markets.
	  Accordingly, the C.M.O. shall within 4 months from
     now   evolve    and   standardise	 these	 norms	 and
     specifications and	 circulate the	same to	 the Market-
     Committees. Respondent  Market-Committees in categories
     'C', 'D' and 'E' in Para-80 supra will, within 3 months
     there from,  revise their	proposals for development in
     accordance	 with	these  norms   and   specifications,
     departures	  from	  standard    specification    being
     permissible if  the special  conditions peculiar to the
     particular markets	 so require  and compel.  The C.M.O.
     will again scrutinise these revised proposals and their
     cost projections  and if,	upon such  scrutiny,  is  of
     opinion that  the present	2% market-fee  of any Market
     Committee in  the category	 'C', 'D'  and 'E'  supra is
     unjustified, the  C.M.O. will  make appropriate  orders
     under S.  150 of the Act directing the Market-Committee
     or Committees concerned to amend their bye-laws to
193
     effect an	appropriate downward revision in the quantum
     of the  fee. Wherever  the C.M.O.	is of  the  opinion,
     after A  an examination of the proposals, that there is
     no need  to make  a downward  revision, he shall make a
     specific note in the behalf. These orders shall be made
     within a period of 8 months from now."
     This is the gist of the discussion of learned Judges of
the High Court in regard to the above point No. 12 framed by
them on	 the question whether enhancement of the market fees
leviable under.	 S. 65	(2) of	the Act from one per cent to
two per	 cent brought about by the amendment of the bye-laws
of the	Market Committees  is unsupportable in law and fails
for want  of correlation with the value of services rendered
to the	payers of the fee. The learned Judges have stated at
the end	 of the	 point in  para 7 of their judgment that the
discussion relating  to the  point is in paras 75 to 110 and
that the  finding is  in para  111. Para 111 extracted above
consists only  of the  direction given by the learned Judges
of the	High Court  to	the  Chief  Marketing  Officer.	 The
learned Judges	have not  expressed their opinion one way or
the other  in para  111 as regards the justification for the
enhancement of	the market  fees leviable  on  buyers  under
section 65  (2) of the Act from one per cent to two per cent
by amendment of the bye-laws though earlier in para 107 they
have observed that they
	  "are unable to hold, on the material placed before
     us by  the petitioners  that the levy ought to fail for
     want of  quid pro	quo; however,  having regard  to the
     infirmities noticed  in  the  estimates  and  financial
     projections of  the proposed developmental works on the
     basis  of	 which	the  enhancement  is  sought  to  be
     justified,	 we   are  also	  unable  to  say  with	 any
     confidence	  and	 without   reservations	  that	 the
     enhancement of  the fee,  depending as it does on those
     estimate  is   totally  justified.	  Some	time   bound
     directions to  which we  will refer  presently,  for  a
     second  look   at	the   estimates	 of   the  statutory
     authorities are required in this behalf."
and they have given the same in para 109 of their judgment.
     Dealing with  the provisions  of the Cardamom Act, 1965
and the	 rules made  thereunder, in  paras 34  to 38  of the
judgment the
194
High Court bas held that the provisions of the Act in so far
as A  marketing of  cardamom is	 concerned, are repugnant to
the provisions of the Cardamom Act (Central Act 42 of 1965).
But in	paras 41  and 42  the High  Court has  held that the
Tobacco Board  Act, 1975 makes provision only in relation to
Virginia tobacco  and not  all varieties  of tobacco and the
Act is	not repugnant to the provisions of the Tobacco Board
Act and all that is necessary is for the Market Committee to
obtain auctioneer's  licence under  the	 provisions  of	 the
Tobacco Board  Act. Proceeding on the basis that the Tobacco
Board Act  is in  relation only	 to Virginia tobacco and not
all varieties  of tobacco  the High  Court has observed that
any  intention	 of  the   "Superior  Legislature"  (meaning
Parliament)  to	  cover	 the   whole  field   and   make   a
comprehensive law  in regard  to marketing of tobacco is not
manifest  in   the  Central   enactment	 and  that  the	 two
legislations can co-exist and operate cumulatively.
     I have  set out  above the	 gist of  the  High  Court's
decisions on the points regarding which alone arguments were
advanced before	 this Court  in the  Writ  Petitions,  Civil
Appeals and Special Leave Petitions. They are:
	  (1) That the provisions of S. 65 (1) of the Act ar
     substituted by  the Amendment  Act 17  of 1980 and also
     the validating S. 42 of that Amendment Act in so far as
     it seeks  to validate the levy of market fee on sellers
     of notified agricultural produce during the period from
     19.5.1975 to 28.9.1978 are unconstitutional and void;
	  (2) That  the Chief Marketing Officer shall within
     four months  from the  date of  the judgment evolve and
     standardise the  norms and specifications and circulate
     the same to the Market Committees is direction given by
     the High  Court. This  was done by the High Court as it
     was conceded  by the learned Advocate General appearing
     for the  Market Committees	 that the exercise suggested
     by the  High Court	 in para  109  of  the	judgment  is
     'necessary and  beneficial as  indeed that	 the  matter
     involved an  outlay of  nearly 145	 crores of rupees in
     the next 8 years on the regulated markets";
	  (3) That  the provisions  of the Act are repugnant
     to the Cardamom Act, 1965 and the Rules framed there.
195
     under but	not the provisions of the Tobacco Board Act,
     1975; and
	  (4) That  a writ  of mandamus	 be issued to direct
     the State	Government  and	 the  Market  Committees  to
     refund to	the Writ  petitioners who had approached the
     High Court and had the benefit of the issuance of writs
     of mandamus  for the refund of the sellers' market fees
     actually paid  under S.  65  (1)  in  cases  where	 the
     mandamus issued  had not  been  complied  with  by	 the
     respondents in  the writ  petitioners in  view  of	 the
     validating	 provision   contained	in   S.	 42  of	 the
     Amendment Act  17 of  1980	 on  such  writ	 petitioners
     filing  their  claims  in	writing	 before	 the  Market
     Committees concerned,  and in  the second	category  of
     cases where the writ petitioners had not approached the
     High Court	 earlier their	claims	for  refund  of	 the
     market fee paid by them as sellers shall be confined to
     the market fees paid under S. 65 (1) within a period of
     3 years  immediately preceding  the presentation of the
     writ petitions,  and the  same procedure as in the case
     of	 the  other  class  of	writ  petitioners  shall  be
     followed.
     Mr.  Soli	 J.  Sorabjee  appearing  for  most  of	 the
appellants and	the petitioners	 in the	 writ petitions	 and
special leave  petitions (namely traders) advanced arguments
on all	the above  points. Mr. S.N. Kackar appearing for the
appellants in  Civil Appeals  Nos.  1247  to  1474  of	1983
adopted the  arguments of  Mr. Sorabjee	 and supplemented it
with his  own. Mr.  Bhatt appearing  for the  State advanced
arguments in  the State's  appeals filed.  against the	High
Court's decision  invalidating S.  65 (1)  as substituted by
the Amendment  Act 17  of  1980	 and  also  S.	42  of	that
Amendment Act and the direction for the refund of the market
fees collected	under s.  65  (1)  as  substituted  by	that
Amendment Act.	Mr..  A.K.  Sen	 appearing  for	 the  Market
Committees  advanced   arguments  on  the  validity  of	 the
amendment of the bye-laws made for enhancement of the market
fees on	 buyers leviable  under s.  65 (2) of the Act, while
Mr. S.T.  Desai, Dr.  Y S.  Chitale and late Mr. P.R. Mridul
appearing  for	the  Market  Committees	 advanced  arguments
supporting the	High Court's judgment that the provisions of
the Act are not repugnant to those of the Tobacco Board Act,
1975.
196
     The submissions of Mr. Sorabjee in short are these:
     The item  of expenses envisaged for the rural roads has
gone with  the striking down of s. 65 (1) and (3) of the Act
and the	 omission of clause (3) of s. 65 from the Act by the
Amendment Act  17 of  1980 from the date of its commencement
as if  it never	 existed on  the statute  book.	 The  amount
collected under	 that sub-section  will	 take  care  of	 the
proposed  expenditure	envisaged  in	the  estimates	 and
projections for	 the improvement  of  the  services  in	 the
regulated markets  and	therefore  the	enhancement  of	 the
market fee  from one  per cent	two per cent of the price of
the specified agricultural produce is invalid. The reduction
of the	enhanced levy  from two	 per cent to one per cent by
the  Circular  No.  SMD-268/RGN-83  dated  27.2.1984  issued
pursuant to  the State	Government's decision shows that the
State Government  and  the  Market  Committees	prefer	this
course to  the exercise	 suggested by  the High	 Court to be
completed within  eight moths of the judgment and that there
was no	justification for  the enhancement of the market fee
from one  per cent  to two per cent by amendment of the bye-
law relating  to the  levy of  market fee under s. 65 (2) of
the Act. The amendment of the bye-laws was not in accordance
with the procedure laid down by s. 148 of the Act for making
bye-laws  and	amendments  thereto  for  want	of  previous
approval  of   the  Chief  Marketing  Officer  and  previous
publication of	the proposed  amendment and  hearing of	 the
affect interests, and ss. 3, 5 (a) and 5 (b) of Ordinance 22
of 1981	 promulgated when  the hearing of the Writ Petitions
in the High Court was in progress would not cure the defect-
In the	course of the arguments before the High Court it was
specifically conceded  that there was no compliance with the
requirement of s. 148 in making the amendment of the bye-law
for enhancement	 of the	 market fee from one per cent to two
per cent.  But on  17.12.1981 Karnataka Ordinance 22 of 1981
was promulgated, and ss. 3 and 5 (a) thereof stated:
	  "3. Amendment of section 148-ID section 148 of the
     principal Act,  in sub-section  (1), the  words  "after
     previous publication  in the  prescribed manner", shall
     be and shall be deemed always to have been omitted.
	  5 (a)	 all acts,  proceedings or  things  done  or
     action taken  by the  State Government or by the Market
     Committees or by any other authority in connection with
     the levy  Of collection  of market	 fec shall  for	 all
     purposes
197
     be deemed	to be  and to have always been done or taken
     in accordance with law"
and s. 5 (b) stated that:
	  "no suit or other proceedings shall be instituted,
     maintained or  continued in  any court  or	 before	 any
     authority for  refund of  any such	 market fee  or	 for
     questioning the  validity of  any action or thing taken
     or done  under the	 said bye-laws	and no	court  shall
     recognise or  enforce any decree or order declaring the
     said bye-laws  or any  action or  thing taken  or	done
     thereunder as  invalid on	the ground that the bye-laws
     were made	with- out  giving reasonable  opportunity to
     persons likely  to be  affected thereby  to file  their
     objections	 and   suggestions,  or	  otherwise  without
     following the procedure prescribed.''
     Ss. 3, 5 (a) and 5 (b) have been replaced by ss. 12 and
14  of	 the  Karnataka	  Agricultural	 Produce   Marketing
(Regulation) (Amendment)  Act, 1982.  The amendment  of	 the
bye-law made  for enhancement of the market fee from one per
cent to two per cent is not in accordance with law. The High
Court has  practically held  so as  can	 be  seen  from	 the
direction given	 by it in para 61 of the judgment as to what
should be  done before a market committee amends its bye-law
to make	 an upward revision of the rate of market fee in the
light of the submission made by the learned Advocate General
appearing for  the State  and the  learned Counsel appearing
for  the   Market  Committees  that  it	 will  be  eminently
desirable that	the  Market  Committees	 should	 adopt	some
reasonable procedure  in that  behalf and that the amendment
of s.  148 (1)	of the	Act made by Ordinance 22 of 1981 was
only intended  to cure	the defect  in	the  making  of	 the
impugned amendment  of the  bye-law to	avoid  great  public
inconvenience which will result from the invalidation of the
bye-law and that there was no intention to make the deletion
a permanent  feature, and any reasonable procedure which may
be suggested  by the High Court would be adopted in practice
even if	 there was  no such  legal compulsion. There were no
resolutions,  estimates	  or  projections   of	the   market
Committees for	making improvements to the regulated markets
immediately or within the near future before the bye-law was
amended for  enhancing the  market fee	from one per cent to
two per cent under the directions of
198
the Chief  Marketing Officer,  and Exs.	 R-1 to	 R-l l l and
other statements  referred to  in the  High Court's judgment
were prepared  long after  the date  of filing	of the	Writ
Petitions in  the  High	 Court	and  only  pursuant  to	 the
directions given  by the  High Court  for  that	 purpose  on
30.11.1981. The High Court was not satisfied even with those
estimates, projections	and  statements	 and  has  therefore
issued the  directions contained in paras 109 and 111 of the
judgment and  those directions have been given in respect of
all the	 Market Committees and not in respect of only 8 or 4
Market	Committees   in	 categories  'C',  'D'	and  'E'  as
contended by  Mr. A.K.	Sen. Enhancement  of the  market fee
from one per cent to two per cent is not justified. The High
Court erred  in holding	 that the  Tobacco Board  Act,	1975
covers only  Virginia tobacco  and is  not repugnant  to the
provisions of  the Act, ignoring the provisions of ss. 8 (2)
(a), 8	(3) and 12 of the Tobacco Board Act and r. 35 of the
Rules  made   under  the  provisions  of  that	Act.  Though
reference is  made in  s. 8  (2) (a)  to (g)  of that Act to
Virginia  tobacco  clause  (h)	relates	 to  "promoting	 the
gradation of  tobacco at  the level  of growers", clause (1)
relates	 to   "sponsoring,   assisting,	  co-ordinating	  or
encouraging scientific,	 technological and economic research
for the	 promotion of  tobacco industry",  and s.'  (3) says
that:
	  "without  prejudice	to  the	 generality  of	 the
     provisions of  subjection (1)  and subject	 to priority
     being given  to matters  specified in  sub-section (2),
     the measures  referred to	in sub-section	(1) may also
     provide in	 relation to  tobacco, other  than  Virginia
     tobacco, for  all or  any of  the matters	specified in
     clauses (c)  to (g)  of sub-section  (2) and  for	this
     purpose any  reference in	those  clauses	to  Virginia
     tobacco shall  be construed as including a reference to
     tobacco other than Virginia tobacco".
S. 12 of the Act says that:
	  "no person  shall export  tobacco or	any  tobacco
     products or  function as  a packer,  auctioneer of,  or
     dealer in, tobacco unless he registers himself with the
     Board in  accordance with	the rules  made	 under	this
     Act."
R.  35	 of  the   Tobacco  Board  Rules,  1976	 relates  to
registration as	 exporter or  packer or	 auctioneer  of,  or
dealer in tobacco.
199
     Clauses (c) to (g) of s. 8 (2) read thus:
	  "(c)	maintenance   and  improvement	of  existing
     markets, and  development of  new markets outside India
     for  Indian  Virginia  tobacco  and  its  products	 and
     devising  of  marketing  strategy	in  consonance	with
     demand for the commodity outside India, including group
     marketing under limited brand names;
	  (cc) establishment  by the  Board of	auction plat
     forms,  with  the	previous  approval  of	the  Central
     Government,  for	the  sale  of  Virginia	 tobacco  by
     registered growers	 or curers,  and functioning  of the
     Board as an auctioneer at auction platforms established
     by or  registered with it subject to such conditions as
     may be specified by the Central Government;
	  (d) recommending to Central Government the minimum
     prices which  may be  fixed far  purposes	of  Virginia
     tobacco with  a view  to avoiding unhealthy competition
     amongst the exporters;
	  (e) regulating  in other respects Virginia tobacco
     marketing in  India  and  export  of  virginia  tobacco
     having  due   regard  to	the  interests	of  growers,
     manufacturers and the nation;
	  (f) propagating information useful to the growers,
     dealers and  exporters (including	packers) of Virginia
     tobacco and  manufacturers of Virginia tobacco products
     and others concerned with Virginia tobacco and products
     thereof, and
	  (g) purchasing  Virginia tobacco from growers when
     the same  is  considered  necessary  or  expedient	 for
     protecting the interests of the growers and disposal of
     the same  in India	 or abroad  as and  when  considered
     appropriate";
     These clauses (c) to (g) would apply to tobacco also in
view of s. g (3) of the Tobacco Board Act.
     Mr. Kacker	 adopted the  arguments of  Mr. Sorabjee and
supplemented it with his own. His submissions are these:
200
     Before sub-section	 (3) of	 s. 65	was struck  down  in
Rajasekhariah's case  (supra) on 28.9.1978 several crores of
rupees bad  been collected  under s.  65 (1)  from 19.5.1975
when it was amended by Amendment Act 24 of 1975 to 28.9.1978
and that amount must be sufficient to meet the estimates and
projections  envisaged	in  Exs.  R-l  to  R-111  and  other
statements prepared  and produced  by the  Market Committees
pursuant to the High Court's directions issued on 30.11.1981
having regard to the fact that subsection (3) of s. 65 under
which that  amount had	to be  credited	 to  the  Roads	 and
Buildings Fund	has been struck down in Rajasekhariah's case
(supra) and  that sub-section  has been omitted from the Act
as if  it never	 existed in  it. The  Market Committees	 had
surplus fund  with them	 in 1979  and they bad no scheme for
effecting improvements	to the	regulated markets  then they
enhanced the  market fee  from one  per cent to two per cent
under sub-section  (2) of  s. 65  of the Act by amending the
bye-law except	the statements	produced in Vaman Rao's case
(supra) in  1974. The statements Exs. R-1 to R-111 and other
statements produced  in the High Court were not in existence
when the  Writ Petitions  were presented  in the High Court.
The market  fee has  been since reduced to one per cent with
effect from  1.4 1984.	The High Court should not have given
an opportunity	to the	Market Committees  to  fill  up	 the
lacuna by  preparing and  producing Exs.  R- I to R- 111 and
the other  statements when  the Writ  Petitions	 were  being
heard in the High Court.
     On the other hand, Mr. A.K. Sen submitted his arguments
which may be summarised thus:
     As many as 4298 Writ Petitions were filed in respect of
93 Market  Committees. Clear quid pro quo was established in
respect of  73 Market  Committees falling in categories 'A',
'B', 'C'  and 'D' for enhancement of the market fee from one
per cent  to two  per cent and no further enquiry was needed
on the	principles laid	 down in  Kewal Krishan	 Puri's case
(supra). The  High Court  found that  reconsideration of the
financial projections by the Market Committees was necessary
only  in  regard  to  8	 out  of  the  remaining  20  Market
Committees, and it was entitled to give the directions which
had been  given to the Chief Marketing Officer to re-examine
them. There is no repugnancy between the Act and the Tobacco
Board Act, 1975.
     Mr. Bhatt	submitted that	after s.  65  (3)  has	been
omitted from  the Act as if it never existed in it there was
no question of striking
201
down s.	 65 (1)	 as substituted	 by the	 Amendment Art 17 of
1980, that  s. 42  of that  Amendment Act  has validated the
levy and  there is no A question of the refund of the market
fee collected under s. 65 (1) as the fee collected under the
Act has to be used for the purposes envisaged by the Act and
than in	 any event  the refund	could be  only to the Market
Committees and not to the traders.
     It is not necessary for me to refer to the arguments of
Mr. S.T.  Desai, Dr.  Y.S. Chitale  and late Mr. P.R. Mridul
regarding the  question of  repugnancy of  the provisions of
the Act	 with those  of the  Tobacco Board  Act, 1975  as my
learned brother	 Murtaza Fazal	Ali, J.	 has dealt with that
question in  his judgment  and I  agree	 with  him  in	that
regard. I  wish to  add that  the learned Judges of the High
Court have disposed of this matter of repugnancy between the
Act and	 the Tobacco  Board Act,  1975 in two short paras 41
and 42	without much  of a  discussion under the belief that
the Tobacco  Board Act,	 1975 concerns only Virginia tobacco
and not	 other varieties  of tobacco.  They have  held after
some discussion	 in paras  34 and  38 of their judgment that
the Act	 is repugnant  to the  Cardamom Act  which is almost
similar to the Tobacco Board Act in its scope and operation.
The consequence	 is that cardamom has to be taken out of the
schedule to  the Act.  No appeal has been filed against that
part of	 the High  Court's  judgment.  The  Act	 relates  to
markets falling	 under entry  28 of  List  II  (markets	 and
fairs) while  the Tobacco  Board Act falls under entry 52 of
List  I	  (industries)	of   the  Seventh  Schedule  to	 the
Constitution. Industries  would certainly  include marketing
of the products. The Act would therefore be repugnant to the
Tobacco	 Board	 Act  in   view	 of  Art.  254	(1)  of	 the
Constitution. The  attention of	 the learned Judges does not
appear to  have been  focussed on  s. 8 (3) and s. 12 of the
Tobacco Board  Act extracted  above and	 r. 35	of the Rules
framed under  that Act,	 a perusal  of which would show that
the Tobacco  Board Act	covers tobacco	of all	varieties in
regard	to  matters  required  to  be  done  by	 the  Market
Committees under  the provisions  of the Act. The High Court
has thus erred in holding that the provisions of the Act are
not repugnant  to the  Tobacco Board Act, 1975 and that they
can co-exist and operate cumulatively.
     In the  course of	arguments both	sides  invited	this
Court's attention  to a	 number of  decisions- I think it is
sufficient if  reference is  made to  only five	 of them and
also to	 the decision  of this	Court in  Civil Appeals Nos.
4500-4501 of 1984 (M/s. Amarnath Om Prakash
202
& Others v. State of Punjab and Food Corporation of India v.
State of  A Punjab)  disposed of on 19.11.1984. The first of
those decisions	 is of Mathew, Bhagwati and Untwalia, JJ. in
State of  Maharashtra &	 Ors. v.  The Salvation	 Army,(l) In
that decision Mathew, J. speaking for the Bench observed:
	  "We do  not think  any such levy for investment or
     diversion of  the surplus	would be consistant with the
     principle behind the levy of fee. While we do not think
     it necessary  that all  available surplus	in a year or
     for some  years should  always go	in for	reducing the
     rate of  contribution for the subsequent year or years,
     we are  of the  view that	the organisation  cannot  be
     allowed   to   accumulate	 an   unreasonable   amount,
     unreasonable in  the sense that the amount might not be
     reasonably	 required   for	 the  proper  and  afficient
     working of the organisation in a foreseeable future. No
     hard and  fast rule  applicable -	in all contingencies
     can be  formulated. The  Court will have to draw a line
     somewhere	when   surplus	must   be  the	 taken	into
     consideration for reducing the levy of contribution. In
     drawing the  line, the Court will have to look into the
     nature of	the organisation,  the potentiality  for its
     growth, the  multiplication in  its work  consequent on
     its expansion  for rendering the services visualised by
     the Act  and the  necessity for  capital expenditure in
     the near  future, as  also the amount of levy collected
     or expected  to be	 collected in  a  year.	 is  already
     stated the	 Division Bench	 was of	 the view  that	 the
     stage when	 the surplus  must be  taken into account to
     determine the  character of the levy was reached by the
     end of  March 31,	1958 when the available surplus came
     to Rs.  30, 44,  541/-. The Division Bench was alive to
     the  desirability	of  locating  the  head	 office	 and
     regional offices  in  buildings  to  be  owned  by	 the
     organisation and  incurring of  capital expenditure  in
     that behalf.  The Charity	Organisation bas purchased a
     building worth  about Rs.	30 lakhs.  Even according to
     the  Division  Bench,  investment	of  the	 surplus  in
     buildings for  locating the  head and  regional offices
     cannot be	said to	 be diversion  of  the	surplus	 for
     purposes alien  to	 the  object  of  the  organisation,
     namely, the better administration of the trusts."
     (1) [1975] 3 S.C.R. 475.
203
     This decision  indicates what  should be  borne in mind
when there is a complaint that the market fee already levied
is A excessive or before any further increase in the levy is
made.
     The second	 decision is that of a Bench of five learned
Judges	of  this  Court	 (Chandrachud,	C.J.  and  Bhagwati,
Untwalia, Murtaza  Fazal Ali  and  Pathak,  JJ	)  in  Kewal
Krishan Puri  v. State	of Punjab  (supra) where the purpose
for which  Marketing Development  Fund and  Market Committee
Funds levied  and collected  under the	Punjab	Agricultural
Produce Markets	 Act, 1961 and justification for enhancement
of the	rate of	 market fee  from two  per cent to three per
cent came up for consideration. This appears to be a leading
decision on  this subject.  It has been relied upon not only
by Mr.	Sorabjee and  Mr. Kacker but also by Mr A.K. Sen. In
that case,  Untwalia, J.  speaking for	the  Bench  observed
thus:
	  "Such a  fee cannot be utilised for the purpose of
     rendering all  sorts of facilities and services for the
     benefit of	 agriculturists throughout  the area. It may
     be very  necessary	 to  render  such  services  to	 the
     agriculturists; rather,  they must be rendered. But the
     laudable end  in itself  cannot justify  the  means  to
     achieve that  end if  the means have got no sanction of
     the law .. ... ... ... ... ...
	  From a  conspectus of	 the various  authorities of
     this Court	 we  deduce  the  following  principles	 for
     satisfying the tests for a valid levy of market fees on
     the agricultural produce bought or sold by licensees in
     a notified market	area:
     (1)  That the  amount of fee realised must be earmarked
	  for rendering	 services to  the licensees  in	 the
	  notified market  area and  a good  and substantial
	  portion of  it must  be shown	 to be	expended for
	  this purpose,
     (2)  That the  services rendered  to the licensees must
	  be in	 relation to  the transaction of purchase or
	  sale of the agricultural produce.
     (3)  That while  rendering services  in  the  marketing
	  area	for   the  purposes   of  facilitating	 the
	  transactions of
204
	  purchase and	sale with  a  view  to	achieve	 the
	  objects   of the  marketing legislation  it is not
	  necessary to	confer the  whole of  the benefit on
	  the licensees	 but some  special benefits  must be
	  conferred on	them which  have a direct, close and
	  reasonable correlation  between the  licensees and
	  the transactions.
     (4)  That while conferring some special benefits on the
	  licensees it is permissible to render such service
	  in the market which may be in the general interest
	  of all  concerned  with  the	transactions  taking
	  place in the market.
     (5)  That spending	 the amount  of market	fees for the
	  purpose of  augmenting the  agricultural  produce,
	  its facility	of  transport  in  villages  and  to
	  provide   other   facilities	 meant	 mainly	  or
	  exclusively for  the benefit of the agriculturists
	  is  not   permissible	 on  the  ground  that	such
	  services in the long run go to increase the volume
	  of   transactions   in   the	 market	  ultimately
	  benefiting the  traders also. Such an indirect and
	  remote benefit  to the  traders is  in no  sense a
	  special benefit to them.
     (6)  That the  element of	quid  pro  quo	may  not  be
	  possible, or	even necessary,	 to  be	 established
	  with arithmetical  exactitude but even broadly and
	  reasonably  it   must	 be   established   by	 the
	  authorities who charge the fees that the amount is
	  being spent  for rendering  services to  those  on
	  whom falls the burden of the fee.
     (7)  At least  a good  and substantial  portion of	 the
	  amount collected  on account of fees, ma be in the
	  neighbourhood of two-thirds or three-fourths, must
	  shown with reasonable certainty as being spent for
	  rendering   services	 of   the   kind   mentioned
	  above.................... The	 benefit  of  market
	  fee, therefore,  has to  be  correlated  with	 the
	  transactions taking  place at	 the specified place
	  in the  market area  and not	in the	whole of the
	  area.
205
	  Supposing a market has been established consisting
     of principal  market yard	or  sub-market	yards  at  a
     particular place  where there  is no  facility for	 the
     carts or  the trucks  and other  vehicles to  go,	then
     approach roads,  and if  necessary	 even  culverts	 and
     bridges may  be constructed,  or repaired	out  of	 the
     Market Committee  Fund. Such  an expenditure within the
     limited limit  will be  with the object of facilitating
     the taking	 place of  the transactions  of purchase and
     sale  in  the  market  and	 will  confer  some  special
     benefits to  the traders  apart from  a  share  of	 the
     benefit going to the agriculturist who are not required
     to share  the burden  of the market fee. But as we have
     pointed out  above, if  one were  to give	a very	wide
     meaning to	 this phrase  of construction  and repair of
     approach roads,  culverts and  bridges to say that such
     construction can  be permitted  anywhere in  the market
     area for  the  facility  of  the  agriculturists  which
     ultimately will  benefit the  traders  also,  then	 the
     whole concept  of correlation  of fee and its character
     of having	an element of quid pro quo will dwindle down
     and become an empty formality.
	  If many  of the  purposes mentioned in the Act, as
     we have  shown above,  are outside	 the  ambit  of	 the
     service element  and  fall	 within	 the  realm  of	 the
     governmental functions, then it is plain that to say by
     generalisation that  the fee money can be spent for the
     purposes of objects of the Act is not quite correct.
	  The High Court points out that the money cannot be
     spent in  construction of	governmental activities	 for
     providing main  roads in  the  State.  How,  then,	 the
     Market Committees	can be made to contribute a very big
     chunk of their market fee income in the construction of
     link roads	 through all  villages ?  To put  the matter
     logically, if  a link  road is to be constructed from a
     village to	 the main road for enabling an agriculturist
     to trans-
206
     port his  produce up  the main  road  then	 the  Market
     Committee should be under an obligation to construct or
     at least  to maintain  the main  road also	 in order to
     enable that agriculturist to reach the market which may
     be at  a distance of 20 miles from the link road. It is
     plain that construction of such link roads is as much a
     part of the R governmental activity as that of the main
     roads.
	  The impost  must be correlated with the service to
     be rendered  to the payers of the fees in the sense and
     to the extent we have pointed out above. Again the High
     Court fell	 into  an  error  in  paragraph	 15  of	 the
     judgment when,  while upholding  the  construction	 and
     repair of	approach roads,	 culverts and bridges in the
     larger sense of the term, it said:
	       'If the	approach roads,	 culverts or bridges
	  are in  such a  bad shape  that they	would become
	  hinderance in the mobility of the produce from one
	  part of  the notified market area to the principal
	  market yard, then the worst suffer or would be the
	  grower  for	whose  benefit	 the  Act  has	been
	  enacted.'
	  It may  be as	 was submitted	before us that it is
     not imperative  either for the Market Committees or the
     Board to  prepare balance-sheets because their accounts
     are audited  by Government auditors but for the purpose
     of raising	 the market  fee any  further, the  balance-
     sheet will	 give a	 truepicture of	 the position  along
     with the  budgets and  estimates. Then,  and then	only
     there may be a legal justification for raising the rate
     of the market fec further to a reasonable limit."
     The third	decision is of Chinnappa Reddy, A.P. Sen and
Baharul Islam, JJ. in Southern Pharmaceuticals and Chemicals
v. State of Kerala & Ors. etc.(1) where Sen, J. speaking for
the Bench has observed at page 542 thus:
     (1) [1982]1 S.C.R. 519.
207
	  "It is also increasingly realised that the element
     of quid  pro quo stricto senso is not always a sine qua
     DOn of  A a  fee. It  is needless	to stress  that	 the
     element of	 quid pro  quo is  not necessarily absent in
     every tax."
     It has  to be  noticed that the observation was made by
the learned Judge in a case in which the appellants who were
manufacturers	of   medicinal	 and   toilet	preparations
containing alcohol challenged the constitutional validity of
certain provisions  of the  Kerala Abkari  Act, 1967. In the
earlier part of the judgment Sen, J. has observed:
	  "The distinction between a 'tax' and 'fee' is well
     settled. The question came up for consideration for the
     first time	 in this  Court in  the Commissioner, H.R.E.
     Madras v.	Lakshmindra Thirtha  Swamiar of	 Shirur Mutt
     (1954 SCR	1005). Therein,	 the Court  speaking through
     Mukherjee, J.  quoted with	 approval the  definition of
     'tax' given  by Latham,  C.J. in  Matthews v.  Chickory
     Marketing Board  (60 CLR 263). In that case the learned
     Chief Justice observed:
	       'A tax  is a  compulsory exaction of money by
	       public	authority    for   public   purposes
	       enforceable by  E law  and is not payment for
	       cervices rendered.'
	  Coming now  to fees, a fee is generally defined to
     be	 a   charge  for   a  special  service	rendered  to
     individuals by some Governmental agency.
	  If, as  we hold,  a fee  is regarded	as a sort of
     return or	consideration for  services rendered,  it is
     absolutely necessary  that the  levy of  fees should on
     the face of the legislative provision, be correlated to
     the expenses  incurred by	Government in  rendering the
     services."
     The same  view was	 taken in  Mahant Sri  Jagannath  v.
State of  Orissa(1) and Rathilal Param Chand Gandhi v. State
of Bombay.(2)
     (1) [1954] S.C.R. 1046.
     (2) 119541 S.C.C. 1055.
208
Therefore, the	aforesaid observation  of Sen, J. that it is
now   increasingly realised that the element of quid pro quo
stricto senso is not always a sine qua non of a fee and that
it is  needless to stress that the element of quidpro quo is
not necessarily absent in very tax cannot be made applicable
to the	facts of  the present  cases which  relate to market
fees where  the	 element  of  quid  pro	 quo  is  absolutely
necessary.
     The fourth	 decision is  A.P. Sen,	 Venkataramiah and R
Misra, JJ,  in Sreenivosa General Traders & Ors. v. State of
Andhra Pradesh(1)  where Sen,  J. speaking for the Bench has
observed:
	  "There is  no generic difference between a tax and
     a fee. Both are compulsory exactions of money by public
     authorities. Compulsion  lies in  the fact that payment
     is enforceable  by law against a person in spite of his
     unwillingness or  want of consent. A levy in the nature
     of a  fee does not cease to be of that character merely
     because  there   is  an   element	of   compulsion	  or
     coerciveness present  in it, nor is it a postulate of a
     fee that  it must	have direct  relation to  the actual
     service rendered  by the  authority to  each individual
     who  obtains   the	 benefit   of  service.	 It  is	 now
     increasingly   realised   that   merely   because	 the
     collections for  the services  rendered or	 grant of  a
     privilege or licence are taken to the consolidated fund
     of the  State and	not separately	appropriated towards
     the expenditure  for rendering  the service  is not  by
     itself decisive..	.. ......  It is  also	increasingly
     realised that the element of quid pro quo in the strict
     sense is  not always  a sine  qua non  for a fee. It is
     needless to  stress that the element of quid pro quo is
     not necessarily absent in every tax."
     The above decision arose out of proceedings taken under
the Andhra  Pradesh  (Agricultural  Produce  and  Livestock)
Market Act,  1966. With respect, it is not possible to agree
with  the   above  observation	that  there  is	 no  generic
difference between  a tax  and a fee and the element of quid
pro quo	 in the	 stricto senso	is not always a sine qua non
for a  fee in  view of	my learned brother Sen's approval in
Southern Pharmaceutical and Chemical's case (supra) of the i
     (1) [1983] 3 S.C.R. 843.
209
distinction pointed  out by  Latham,  C.J.  in	Matthews  v.
Chickory Marketing  Board (supra)  between a tax and fee and
that it is A absolutely necessary that levy of fee should on
the face  of the legislative provisions be correlated to the
expenses incurred  in rendering	 services  and	the  learned
Judge's observation  in that decision that the same view was
reiterated by  this Court  in Mahant  Sri Jagannath  Ramanuj
Das's case  (supra),  Rathilat	Param  Chand  Gandhi's	case
(supra) and also in view of the decision of the larger Bench
of five	 Judges of  this Court	in Kewal Krishan Puri's case
(supra) that  quid pro	quo is	a necessary  element of	 the
market fee.  The fifth	decision is  of Desai  and Chinnappa
Reddy, JJ.  in	Municipal  Corporation	of  Delhi  v.  Mohd.
Yasin(1)  where	  my  learned  brother	Chinnppa  Reddy,  J.
speaking for the Bench has observed:
	  "Though a  fee must  have relation to the services
     rendered or  the advantages  conferred,  such  relation
     need not  be direct, a mere casual relation is enough."
     D
     That was  a case  where the Delhi Municipal Corporation
purported to enhance the fee for slaughtering animals in the
slaughter houses  from 25  paise to  one rupee per animal in
the case  of sheep,  goats and	pigs and  from one  rupee to
eight rupees  per animal  in the  case	of  buffaloes.	With
respect, it  is not  possible to  accept  this	view  having
regard to  the decision	 of a  large Bench  of this Court in
Kewal Krishan  Puri's case  (supra) which  is relied upon by
both sides in these cases as stated above.
     (1) [1983] 3 S.C.R. 229,
210
observation. In	 Kewal Krishan Puri's case (supra) while the
construction of	 link roads has been welcomed by the learned
Judges, it has been observed:
	  "Uplift of villages and helping the agriculturists
     by all  means is  the duty	 and the  obligation of	 the
     State no  doubt and  it  has  to  do  it  by  incurring
     expenses out  of the public exchequer consisting of the
     income from various kinds of taxes etc."
Referring to  the observations of A.P. Sen. J. in Sreenivasa
General Traders's  case	 (supra)  Chinnappa  Reddy,  J.	 has
observed in his judgment thus:
	  "He  also   draw  attention	to  the	  increasing
     realisation that  the element  of quid  pro quo  in the
     strict sense was not always a sine que non for fee. Nor
     was the  element of  quid pro quo necessarily absent in
     every tax.	 He further  pointed out  that an insistence
     upon a  good  and	substantial  portion  of  an  amount
     collected on  account of  fee, say in the neighbourhood
     of	 two-thirds   or  three-fourths,  being	 shown	with
     reasonable certainty as having been spent for rendering
     services in  the market  to the  payer of the fee could
     not be a rule of universal application, and that it was
     a rule  which had	necessarily to	be confined  to	 the
     special facts  of Kewal  Krishan Puri'  s case (supra).
     Other wise,  it would affect. the validity of marketing
     legislations undertaken  throughout the  country during
     the past half a century. We agree with the view of Sen,
     J. that  the observations	extracted by  him from Kewal
     Krishan Puri's  case were not really necessary for that
     case and  we also	agree with  the clarification of the
     observation made by Sen, J.
     With respect,  I am  not able  to see  how an  why	 the
observations made  in Kewal Krishan Puri's case (supra) have
to be  confined to  the special	 facts of  that case.  Kewal
Krishan Puri's case arose out of proceedings taken under the
Punjab Agricultural  Produce Markets  Act, 1961	 which is an
Act for the better regulation of the purchase, sale, storage
and  processing	  of  agricultural   produce  and   for	 the
establishment of  markets for  agricultural produce  in that
State. The objects of that Act and the Act with which we are
211
concerned in  these cases  are almost  the same. The maximum
rate of	 market fee  which could  be levied  by the  various
market committees  under s.  23 of  the Punjab Act was fifty
paise for every hundred rupees. The fee was raised from time
to time.  A number  of writ petitions were filed in the High
Court challenging  the power  of the  Board to	increase the
levy. That is what has happened in these cases arising under
the Act	 which relates	to  Karnataka  State.  The  question
whether quid  pro quo  was necessary  and to what extent and
what should  be done by the Market Committees before the fee
could be  raised fell  for considration	 in that  case as in
these cases.  In Sreenivash   General  Traders' case (supra)
which arose  under the	Andhra Pradesh (Agricultural Produce
and Livestock) Markets Act, 1966 the market fee which was 25
paise per  hundred rupees  was C  raised to 50 paise in 1972
and eventually	to one	rupee for  every hundred rupees. The
contention was	that increase  in the rate of market from 50
paise to  one rupee was illegal on the ground that there was
no  correlation	  between  the	increase  and  the  services
rendered. That	is exactly  the position in the present case
where the  increase was from one per cent to two per cent of
the price  paid by  the buyers. Therefore, with respect I an
unable to  see how  and why  what l-as been decided in Kewal
Krishan Puri's	case (supra) should he confined to the facts
of that	 case alone.  Again with  respect, I consider myself
bound by  the decision in Kewal Krishan Puri's case and that
even the  Bench of  which I am one of three is bound by that
decision  having   regard  to	the   principles   governing
precedents and the necessity to avoid confusion in the minds
of the	High Courts  and Subordinate  Courts as	 regards the
correct view  to be  followed by them. Fortunately, in these
cases, as  stated above, both sides relied upon the decision
in Kewal  Krishan Puri's  case (supra) which inter alia laid
down of following principles:
     1.	  That the  amount of fee realised must be earmarked
     for rendering services to the licensees in the notified
     market area  and a	 good and  substantial portion of it
     must be shown to be expended for this purpose;
     2.	  That the  element of	quid  pro  quo	may  not  be
     possible or  even	necessary  to  be  established	with
     arithmetical exactitude;
     3.	  That at  least a  good and  substantial portion of
     the amount	 collected on account of fees, may be in the
     neighbourhood of two-thirds or three-fourths, must
212
     be shown  with reasonable certainty as being spent	 for
     rendering	services   of  the  kind  mentioned  in	 the
     judgment; and
     4.	  That if  the market  fee is  sought to  be  raised
     proper budgets,  estimates and  balance-sheets  showing
     the balance  of the  money in  hand and in deposit, the
     estimated	income	 and  expenditure   etc.  should  be
     carefully prepared.
     It may  be that  it is  not imperative  either for	 the
Market Committee  or the  Board (Chief	Marketing officer in
the present  cases) to	prepare balance-sheets because their
account are  audited by	 Government auditors for the purpose
of raising  market fee	any further.  The balance-sheet will
given a	 true picture  of the position also with the budgets
and estimates  and then	 and only  then there  may be  legal
justification for  raising the	market fee  to a  reasonable
extent. On  drawing the correct balance-sheets and preparing
correct estimates  and budgets	the authorities will be able
to know the correct position to decide reasonably as to what
extent the raising of the market fee can be justified taking
an over-all picture of the matter.
     It may  be noticed	 that even  the High Court has given
similar directions  to the  Market Committees  and the Chief
Marketing Officer  to see whether there is justification for
increasing the	market fee from one per cent to two per cent
on the	invitation of the learned Advocate General appearing
for the	 State and  the learned	 Consel	 appearing  for	 the
Market Committee as stated above.
     Now that  I have  set out the facts and the decision of
the High  Court to the extent necessary and the arguments of
the learned  counsel for  the parties and the lay bearing on
the questions  involved as  It understand the same I proceed
to record  my findings.	 The principles	 of law laid down by
the Bench  of five  learned Judges  of this  Court in  Kewal
Krishan Puri's	case (supra)  so long  as they have not been
dissented from,	 varied or  set aside  by a larger Bench are
binding, with  respect, not  only on smaller Benches of this
Court but  also undoubtedly  on the  High Courts  and  other
Subordinate Courts  and parties	 similarly  placed.  I	have
already pointed	 out that  the facts  and the  points  which
arose for consideration in
213
Kewal  Krishan	 Puri's	 case  (supra),	 Sreenivasa  General
Traders' case  (supra) and  the present	 cases	are  broadly
similar. All  these cases   relate  to market  fees and	 the
enhancement thereof.  I have  set out  the seven points laid
down by	 this Court  in Kewal Krishan Puri's case (supra) in
the earlier  part of  my judgment  and four  of those points
which have  a direct bearing on these cases in the preceding
paras. It  16 not necessary to establish the element of quid
pro  quo   in  regard	to  market  fees  with	arithmetical
exactitude, but	 an amount  of fee  must  be  earmarked	 for
rendering services to the buyers in the notified market area
and a good and substantial portion of it must be shown to be
expended  for  those  purposes.	 The  good  and	 substantial
portion earmaked  for  rendering  services  may	 be  in	 the
neighbourhood of  two-thirds or three-fourths and it must be
shown with reasonable certainly as being spent for rendering
services of  the kind mentioned in Kewal Krishan Puri's case
(supra). If  the market	 fee is	 sought to be raised, proper
budgets, estimates, balance-sheets showing the money in hand
and in	deposit, expenditure  on projects  to be  undertaken
etc. should  be carefully prepared. Then and only then there
may be	a legal	 justification for  raising the	 rate of the
market fee further to a reasonable extent, for only then the
authorities will be able to know the correct position and to
decide reasonably  as to  what extent  the  raising  of	 the
market fee  can be justified, taking an over-all view of the
matter. But in the present cases, none of these requirements
was satisfied  before the  market fee  was raised The Market
Committees had	no such	 material before  them	before	they
raised the  rate  of  the  market  fee	from  one  per	cent
uniformly to two per cent by amendment of the bye-law on the
mere direction	of the	Chief Marketing Officer. These facts
are not	 in dispute. Therefore, with respect, the High Court
erred in  law in not applying the principle of law laid down
by this	 Court in  Kewal Krishan  Puri's  case	(supra)	 and
failing to  strike down	 the enhancement  of the  market fee
from one  per cent to two per cent on account of the failure
to comply  with the  principles laid  down in  Kewal Krishan
Puri's case  (supra). The  State Government  and the  Market
Committees appear  rightly to  have retraced  their steps by
reducing the rate of the market are from two per cent to one
per cent by the Circular No. SMD-268/ RGN-83 dated 27.2 1984
with effect  from 1.4.1984.  The learned  Judges of the High
Court themselves  do not  appear to  have been	quite  happy
about how  the enhancement  of the market fee had been made,
for they  have observed	 in para  61 of	 their judgment,  as
mentioned above, that the question might become a live issue
if the	Market Committees  were to  amend the  bye-laws made
under s.l48
214
read with  s.65(2) of  the Act	in future  without giving an
opportunity   to the  affected interests  of being  heard in
regard	to   the  proposed  enhancement.  Even	the  learned
Advocate General  appearing for	 the State  and the  learned
Counsel appearing  for	the  Market  Committees	 had  stated
before the learned Judges of the High Court that it would be
eminently desirable  that the Market Committees should adopt
some reasonable	 procedure  in	that  behalf  and  that	 the
amendment to  s.148 of	the Act made by Ordinance 22 of 1981
dispensing with	 the need  for prior publication and hearing
of the	affected interests  was only  intended to  cure	 the
defect in  making the  impugned amendment to the bye-law for
avoiding 'great	 public inconvenience  which may result from
the invalidation of the bye-law and there was no
 intention  to make  the  deletion,  brought  about  by	 the
Ordinance, a  permanent feature'.  They submitted before the
learned	 Judges	 of  the  High	Court  that  any  reasonable
procedure which may be suggested by them would be adopted in
future 'even if there is no such legal compulsion'. In these
circumstances, the  High Court	has observed: "It appears to
us that before the Market Committees propose to amend a bye-
law to	make an	 upward revision  of the  rate	of  fee,  in
future,	 the   Market  Committees   must  first	 follow	 the
directions of  the Supreme Court (given) in para 55 in Kewal
Krishan Puri's	case". The  learned Judges  have  thereafter
given the  directions contained in the judgment in that case
as mentioned above. With respect, I am unable to see how the
directions given  by this Court in Kewal Krishan Puri's case
(supra) should	be followed  only in future and how there is
no compulsion in law for the Market Committees to follow the
directions already  given by this Court in that case and how
this could  be dispensed  with or ignored for the purpose of
the impugned enhancement. with respect I think that the High
Court has  erred in  not applying the principles of law laid
down by	 this Court in Kewal Krishan Puri's case (supra) and
in observing  that they should be applied only in future. In
these circumstances,  I hold  that the	enhancement  of	 the
market fee from one per cent to two per cent by amendment of
the bye-law  under the	directions of  the  Chief  Marketing
Officer without complying with the principles of law down in
Kewal Krishan  Puri's case  (supra) is	bad in law. The same
would be  the position	even if the amendment to the bye-law
made in	 accordance with  s. 148  of the  Act as it is stood
before the amendment by the Ordinance 22 of 1981.
     Point No.	12 in  para 7  of the  High Court's judgment
relating to  the question  of enhancement  of the market fee
reads thus:
215
	  "Whether the	enhancement of	market fee  leviable
     under s.  65(2) of the Act from one per cent to two per
     A cent  brought about  by the  amendment of the bye-law
     responnents-Market-Committees is  unsupportable in	 law
     and fails	for want  of correlation  with the  value of
     services rendered to the payers of the fee."
     The burden	 cast on  the appellants  is  to  prove	 the
negative. The appellant are bound to succeed in the light of
the decision  in Kewal	Krishan Puri's	case (supra) if they
prove that  the enhancement  of	 the  market  fee  was	made
without complying  with the law laid down in that case. That
has been  established by the appellant without any manner of
doubt whatsoever.
     As rightly	 contended by  Mr. Kacker the High Court has
erred in  giving the direction dated 30.11.1981 to the Chief
Marketing Officer  for furnishing  a comprehensive statement
in respect  of each  of the  Market Committees	in a tabular
form as	 indicated in  para 69 of the impugned judgment, set
out in	the earlier  part of  this judgment.  The High Court
has, thus,  given an opportunity to the Market Committees to
fill up	 the lacuna  since the materials supplied thereafter
by way of Exs. R- I to R- 111 and similar statements perused
by the	High Court  were not available either on the date of
the amendment  of the  bye-law enhancing  the  rate  of	 the
market fee  from one per cent to two per cent or even on the
dates on  which the  Writ Petitions  were filed	 in the High
Court. The  High Court has erred in giving the direction and
granting an  opportunity to the Market Committees to fill up
the lacuna.  I do  not agree with Mr. A.K. Sen that the High
Court was entitled to do so.
     The High  Court has found even Exs . R- I to R- 111 and
the other  statements prepared and furnished pursuant to its
order  dated  30.11  1981  not	sufficient  to	sustain	 the
enhancement of	the fee.  This is  clear from  what the High
Court has  stated in  paras 107 to 111 of its judgment which
is extracted for ready reference:
	  "107. The  upshot of	the above discussion is that
     though we	are unable  to hold,  on the material placed
     before us	by the	petitioners, that  the levy ought to
     fail for want of quid pro quo, however having regard to
     the infirmities  noticed in the estimates and financial
     projections of  the proposed developmental works on the
     basis of which the
216
     enhancement is  sought to	be justified,  we  are	also
     unable  to	  say  with   any  confidence	and  without
     reservations that	the enhancement	 of fee depending as
     it does  on those	estimates is totally justified. Some
     time-bound directions  to which we will refer presently
     for a  second look	 at the	 estimates by  the statutory
     authorities are required to be issued in this behalf.
	  108. Indeed,	having regard  to the  wide range of
     the  apparently   inexplicable  disproportions  in	 the
     developmental   projects	of   the   various   Market-
     Committees both  the learned  Advocate-General and	 the
     learned Counsel  for the Market Committees, stated that
     there was	obvious scope-in  our opinion  an imperative
     need-for  some   rationalisation  of   the	 pattern  of
     development of  market-yards based	 upon and related to
     the relevant  factors such	 as quantum  and  nature  of
     agricultural   produce    handled	 by   the   markets;
     potentialities of	development of	the  market  in	 the
     reason ably  near future  and the	like. It  is neither
     possible nor advisable to lay down exhaustively all the
     criteria that  may become relevant to the task. However
     the need  for such exercise to regulate the development
     to	 these	market	yards  on  scientific  rational	 and
     uniform basis was accepted by all the parties.
	  109. A  time-bound schedule  has to  be prescribed
     for the Chief Marketing Officer, as the authority under
     the  'Act,	  approving  the   budgets,  to	 evolve	 and
     standardise  broad	  and  general	norms,	taking	into
     account the  observations made  in the  course of	this
     order,  both  for	infra-structural  and  developmental
     works and	services, on  as  uniform  a  basis  as	 may
     reasonably	 be   feasible,	 for   the  various  markets
     depending upon  their classification  to be made by the
     C.M.O. On	the basis  of  such  criteria  he  may	deem
     relevant and also to evolve corresponding cost patterns
     of the  projects  with  suitable  inbuilt	indicia	 for
     escalation of  cost  structures,  from  time  to  time,
     proportional to  the rise	in the	price  of  material.
     These norms  shall operate	 as broad and general guide-
     lines for	the development	 of  regulated	markets	 and
     shall be  kept in	view of	 the  market  committees  in
     planning developmental projects.
217
     Departure from  these norms  and  standards  shall,  of
     course,  be   permissible	 on   grounds	of   special
     requirements  of individual regulated markets depending
     upon   their    specific	individual    problems	 and
     requirements. At the time of sanction of the budgets of
     the Market-Committees  the C.M.O. should scrutinise the
     budgets with  reference to and applying the broad-norms
     and criteria  evolved and	adopted by  him so  that the
     programme and  the projects  of development  for next 8
     years are	need based  and are  as far  as may be, on a
     uniform and rational basis.
	  110. The  learned Advocate-General and the learned
     counsel for  the Market  Committees concede  that	this
     exercise is  necessary and	 beneficial  as	 indeed	 the
     matter involved  an outlay	 of  nearly  145  crores  of
     rupees in the next 8 years on the regulated markets.
	  111. Accordingly, the C.M.O. shall within 4 months
     from  now	 evolve	 and  standardise  these  norms	 and
     specifications and	 circulate the	same to	 the  Market
     Committees. Respondent-Market-Committees  in categories
     'C', 'D' and 'E' in Para-80 supra will, within 3 months
     therefrom, revise	their proposals	 for development  in
     accordance	 with	these  norms   and   specifications,
     departures	  from	  standard    specification    being
     permissible if  the special conditions peculiar to. the
     particular markets	 so require  and compel.  The C.M.O.
     will again scrutinise these revised proposals and their
     cost-projections and  if, upon  such  scrutiny,  is  of
     opinion that  the present	2% market-fee cf any Market-
     Committee in  the category	 'C', 'D'  and ùE'  supra is
     unjustified, the  C.M.O. will  make appropriate  orders
     under s.  150 of the Act directing the Market Committee
     or Committees  concerned to  amend	 their	bye-laws  to
     effect an	appropriate downward revision in the quantum
     of the  fee. Wherever  the C.M.O.	is of  the  opinion,
     after an examination of the proposals, that there is no
     need to  make a  downward revision,  he  shall  make  a
     specific note in the behalf. These orders shall be made
     within a period of 8 months from now."
     What the  High Court has stated in paras 107 to 110 and
in the	first sentence	of para	 111 would  apply to all the
Market-Committees
218
which had  enhanced the	 market fee from one per cent to two
per A  cent, and  the Chief Marketing Officer has been given
four months time from the date of the judgment to evolve and
standaries the norms and specifications and to circulate the
samo to the Market Committees. After giving such a direction
the learned  Judges of	the High Court have given some other
direction to  the Market  Committees falling  in  categories
'C', 'D'  and 'E'  mentioned in	 para 80  of their judgment,
namely "within	three months  therefrom they  should  revise
their proposals for development in accordance with the norms
and specifications.  Then the  Chief Marketing	officer will
again scrutinise  these revised	 proposals  and	 their	cost
projections, and  if upon  such a  scrutiny  he	 is  of	 the
opinion that  the present  two per cent of market fee of any
Market	Committee   in	categories   'C'  'D'	and  'E'  is
unjustified, he	 will make  the appropriate orders directing
the Market  Committees concerned  to amend their bye-laws to
effect an  appropriate downward	 revision in  the quantum of
the fee	 and wherever he is of the opinion after examination
of the	proposals that	there is  no need to make a downward
revision he  shall make a specific not in this behalf and he
shall make these orders within a period of eight months from
the date  of the judgment". It is not clear why after giving
the  general   direction  in   respect	of  all	 the  Market
Committees which  had enhanced	the market  fee from one per
cent to	 two per  cent the  learned Judges of the High Court
thought it  necessary to  give another	set of directions to
the Market  Committee falling in categories 'C' 'D' and 'E'.
This confusion	was perhaps  responsible for  Mr.  A.K.	 Sen
contending seriously in the course of his arguments that the
directions given  by the High Court relate to only 8 or 4 of
the Market Committees falling in categories 'C' 'D' and 'E'.
It is  not possible  to accept	this argument for the reason
that the  High Court  has not  recorded any finding on Point
No. 12 to the effect that there is sufficient correlation in
respect of  all the  Market Committees	except 8 or 4 of the
market Committees  falling in  categories 'C', 'D' and '13'.
After setting  out Point  No. 12 in para 7 of their judgment
the learned Judges of the High Court have indicated that the
discussion relating  to that point is in paras 75 to 110 and
that the  finding is  in para  111.  As	 stated	 earlier,  a
perusal of  paras 107 to 110 and first sentence in para 111,
especially para	 110, would show that the direction has been
given by  the learned  Judges in  respect of  all the Market
Committees which  had enhanced	the fee from one per cent to
two per	 cent. The  learned Judges  have stated	 in para 110
that the  learned Advocate  General appearing  for the State
and the learned Counsel appearing for the
219
Market Committees  conceded that  the exercise	suggested by
the  learned  Judges  in  para	109  of	 there	judgment  is
necessary and	beneficial  as the matter involved an outlay
of nearly  145 crores  of rupees  in the next eight years on
the regulated  market. Surely,	an outlay  of 145  croces of
rupees could  not be in respect of only 8 or 4 of the Market
Committees falling  in categories  'C',	 'D'  and  'E'.	 The
learned Judges	of the	High Court have observed in para 107
øf their  judgment that	 having regard	to  the	 infirmities
noticed in  the estimates  and financial  projections of the
proposed developmental	works on  the  basis  of  which	 the
enhancement is	sought to  be justified	 they "are unable to
say with  any confidence  and without  reservations that the
enhancement of	the fee	 depending, as	it  does,  on  these
estimates is  totally justified",  and that  some time-bound
directions to  which they  would refer	for having  a second
look at	 the estimates	of  the	 statutory  authorities	 are
required  to   be  issued.   There  is	 nothing  in   these
observations of	 the High  Court to  indicate that  they are
confined to  only 8 or 4 of the market Committees falling in
categories 'C',	 'D' and 'E'. The learned Judges of the High
Court have  no doubt  observed in the first sentence in para
107 that  on the  materials placed  before them	 by the writ
petitioners they cannot hold that the levy ought to fail for
want of	 quid pro  quo. With  respect I	 think that there is
some confusion	in this	 part of  the judgment	of the	High
Court which has given room for argument of Mr. A.K. Sen that
the directions	have been  given only in repect of 8 or 4 of
the Market  Committees falling	in categories  'C', 'D'	 and
'E'.As stated  earlier the  learned Judges of the High Court
have not  recorded any finding on Point No. 12 to the effect
that correlation  is established satisfactorily in regard to
all the	 Market Committees which had enhanced the market fee
from one  per cent  to two  per cent  except 8	or 4  of the
Market Committees  falling in  categories 'C',	'D' and 'E'.
The direction given in para 111 is stated under Point No. 12
in para 7 of the impugned judgment to be the finding on that
point relating	to correlation. I, therefore, agree with Mr.
Sorabjee that  the directions  given in paras 107 to 110 and
the first  sentence in	para 111  of the  impugned  judgment
relate to  all the  Market Committees which had enhanced the
market fee from one per cent to two per cent and not to only
8 or  4 of  the Market Committees falling in categories 'C',
'D' and 'E' and that in view of the observation made in para
107 that  having regard	 to the	 infirmities noticed  in the
estimates  and	 financial  projections	  of  the   proposed
development  works   on	 the   basis  of   which  alone	 the
enhancement is sought to be justified they are unable to say
with any confidence and without reservations
220
that the  enhancement of  the fee is totally justified, they
should have  held that there is no conelation and that there
is no  justification for  the enhancement  of  rate  of	 the
market fee.  For these	reasons, I  hold that  there  is  no
correlation and	 that there  is	 no  justification  for	 the
enhancement of	the market  fee from one per cent to two per
cent. I am constrained to observe that the learned judges of
the High  Court have  failed to	 exercise  the	jurisdiction
vested in  them by law by not recording any finding on Point
No. 12	one way	 or the	 other, namely,	 that there is or no
correlation,  and   that  they	 have  clothed	 the  Market
Committees  and	 the  Chief  Marketing	Officer	 with  their
jurisdiction to	 decide the question whether the enhancement
is justified  and if  not justified  to	 effect	 a  downward
revision wherever necessary.
     In view  of  what	has  been  stated  above  about	 the
enhancement of	the market  fee	 the  question	whether	 the
amendment of the bye laws for raising the rate of the market
fee from  one per cent to two per cent has been validly male
or not	becomes academic and is, however, considered for the
sake of	 completeness. According to s. 148 (1) of the Act as
it stood  on the  date of  the amendment of the bye-laws for
enhancing the  rate of	the market  fee from one per cent to
two per	 cent and  on the  dates on which the Writ Petitions
were filed  in the  High Court "subject to the provisions of
this Act and the rules made thereunder under s. 146 and with
the previous  sanction of  the	Chief  Marketing  Officer  a
market committee  may, after  previous	publication  in	 the
prescribed  manner,  make  bye-law  for	 regulation  of	 the
business and  the conditions  of trading in the market area.
Every bye-law made in this section shall be published in the
prescribed manner".  As	 stated	 earlier,  the	question  of
market fee  would fall under s. 148 (2) (XXXiii) of the Act.
It was	contended before  the High  Court that	there is  no
compliance with	 the requirement  of previous  sanction	 and
previous publication  in the  prescribed manner in regard to
the amendment  of the  bye-laws for  raising the  market fee
leviable under s. 65 (2) of the Act from one per cent to two
per cent. The High Court has observed that finding no answer
to that criticism in regard to the amendment of the bye-laws
the State  Government has  come forward with Ordinance 22 of
1981 when the arguments in the Writ Petitions were coming to
a close.  That Ordinance  has since  been  replaced  by	 the
Karnataka Act 4 of
 1982. ss. 3 and 5 of the Ordinance which have been replaced
by ss. 2 and 114 the Amendment Act may be extracted for easy
reference:
221
	  "3. Amendment	 of section  148.-In section  148 of
     the principal Act, in sub-section (1), the words 'after
     previous publication  in the  prescribed manner", shall
     be and shall be deemed always to have been omitted."
	  "5. Validation-Nothwithstanding anything contained
     in any  judgment, decree or order of any court or other
     authority, any  bye-law made or purporting to have been
     made, and levy or collection of market fee made and any
     action or	thing taken or done in relation to such levy
     or collection  under the  provisions of  the  principal
     Act, before the commencement of this Ordinance shall be
     deemed to	be as valid and effective as if such bye-law
     or levy or collection or action or thing had been made,
     taken or  done under  the principal  Act as  amended by
     section 2 and 3 of this Ordinance and accordingly,-
     (a)  all acts,  proceedings or  things done  or  action
     taken by  the State  Government or by the Market Commit
     tee or  by any other officer of the State Government or
     of the  Market Committee  or by  any other authority in
     connection with  the levy	or collection  of the market
     fee shall,	 for all  purposes, be	deemed to  be and to
     have always  been done or taken in accordance with law;
     and
     (b)  no suit  or other proceedings shall be instituted,
     maintained or  continued in  any Court  or	 before	 any
     authority for  refund of  any such	 market fee  or	 for
     questioning the  validity of  any action or thing taken
     or done  under the	 said bye-laws,	 and no	 court shall
     recognise or  enforce any decree or order declaring the
     said bye-laws  or any  action or  thing taken  or	done
     thereunder as  invalid on	the ground that the bye-laws
     were made	without giving	reasonable G  opportunity to
     persons likely  to be  affected thereby  to file  their
     objections	 and   suggestions,  or	  otherwise  without
     following the procedure prescribed".
     Previous publication  referred to	in s.  148(1) as  it
originally stood  before the  amendment to the bye-la vs for
enhancing the rate
222
validates the  amendment to  the bye-laws  made without such
previous publication  without giving  an opportunity  to the
affected interests  of being  heard in	the matter. The High
Court has  found that  in these	 cases the  Chief  Marketing
Officer	 himself   had	given	directions  to	 the  Market
Committees to  amend the  bye laws  for enhancing the market
fee from  one per cent to two per cent and the bye-laws were
amended by  the Market	Committees accordingly	and that the
Chief Marketing	 Officer's direction  to amend	the bye-laws
for enhancing  the rate of the market fee can be regarded as
his previous  approval. I  am unable to agree with this view
of the	learned Judges	of the High Court. Previous approval
can only  be of	 some proposal	or resolution  of the Market
Committees for doing one or the other of the things required
to  be	 done  under   the  provisions	 of  the  Act.	When
undisputably there was no such resolution or proposal by the
Market Committees  for enhancement of the rate of the market
fee I  am unable  to see  how the  direction  of  the  Chief
Marketing Officer  given to  the Market	 Committees to amend
the bye-laws for raising the rate of the market fee from one
per cent  to two  per cent  can	 be  considered	 to  be	 his
approval. Admittedly,  there was  no previous publication as
required by  s. 148(1) as it stood at the relevant time, and
that requirement  is purported	to have	 been dispensed with
retrospectively by  s. 3  of Ordiance 22 of 1981. It is seen
from the  impugned judgment that it was submitted before the
learned	 Judges	  of  the   High  Court	 that  the  affected
interests' right of being heard was conferred by the Statute
and it	has been  taken away  by the subsequent amendment to
the Statute  with retrospective	 effect and  that there	 is.
therefore, no ground for the affected interests to complain.
No such	 submissions were,  however,  made  in	this  Court.
Market fee  is not a tax which is imposed by law passed by a
Legislature where the interests affected are or are supposed
to be  represented unlike  the market  fee  the	 enhancement
whereof	 is  made  by  subordinate  legislation	 by  way  of
amendment of  the relevant bye-law by the Market Committees.
That is why the provision for
 previous publication was made in s. 148(1) of the Act as it
stood at the relevant time. It is not possible to accept the
contention that the right given by law was taken away by law
and cannot, therefore, be
223
claimed	 by  the  affected  interests,	for  though  it	 was
mentioned in  s. 148(1)	 of the	 Act  as  it  stood  at	 the
relevant time  it was  a right	A which was available to the
affected interests  under the  principles of natural justice
of being  heard before	the enhancement	 could be  made. The
High Court  appears to	have been aware of this position and
to have	 not been  quite happy	about how the enhancement of
the market  fee has  been brought  about,  for	the  learned
Judges have  observed in  para 61 of their judgment that the
question might	become a live issue if the Market Committees
were to	 amend the  bye-laws in	 future	 without  giving  an
opportunity of	being heard  to the affected interests. Even
the learned Advocate General appearing for the State and the
learned Counsel	 appearing for	the  Market  Committees	 had
stated before  the learned Judges of the High Court that the
amendment to  s. 148(1)	 made  by  the	Ordinance  was	only
intended to  cure the defect in making the impugned bye-laws
to avoid  great public	inconvenience and  that there was no
intention  to  make  the  deletion  of	the  requirement  of
previous publication  a permanent  feature. The right of the
affected interests  of being  heard before Market Committees
could raise  the rate  of  the	market	fee  being  a  right
available to  them under  the principles  of natural justice
cannot be  denied to  them even by omitting in s. 148(1) the
clause relating	 to previous  publication of the proposal to
make or	 amend any  bye-law under  s. 148 of the Act. In any
event the  amendment has  not taken  away the requirement of
previous approval  of the Chief Marketing Officer, and since
there was no resolution or proposal of the Market Committees
to enhance  the rate  of the  market fee  before  the  Chief
Marketing  Officer   gave  the	 direction  to	 the  Market
Committees to  amend the bye-laws for raising the market fee
the direction  cannot  be  taken  as  previous	approval  of
something which	 was not  in  existence	 at  that  time.  I,
therefore, hold	 that the amendment of the bye-laws made for
enhancement of	the rate of the Market fee from one per cent
to two	per cent  is invalid  in law notwithstanding s. 3 of
Ordinance 22 of 1981 and s. 12 of Karnataka Act 4 of 1982.
     S. 65(1) of the Act as it originally stood provided for
Market Committees  to levy  and	 collect  market  fees	from
buyers in  respect of  agricultural produce bought by (V any
trader or  other person	 in the	 yard and  (ii)	 any  trader
outside the market or sub-market in the market area, at such
rate as	 may be specified in the bye-laws (which will not be
more than  thirty paise	 per one hundred rupees of the price
of the specified agricultural produce) in such manner and at
such times  as may  be specified  in the  bye-laws. S. 65(2)
laid down  that for  the purposes  of sub-section  (1),	 all
notified agricultural
224
produce leaving a yard shall, unless the contrary is proved,
be presumed  to have  been bought  within such	yard by	 the
person in  possession of  such produce. S. 65 was amended by
Amendment Act 24 of 1975 which came into force on 19.5.1975.
S. 2  of  that	Amendment  Act	substituted  s.	 65  of	 the
principal Act  as amended by Act "0 of 1973 by a new section
which read as:
	  "S. 65. Levy of market fees.-
     (1)  The  market  committees  shall  levy	and  collect
     market fees from every buyer in respect of agricultural
     produce sold  by such  seller in the market area at the
     rate of  one rupee	 for one hundred rupees of the price
     of such produce sold;
      (2) the  market  committees  shall  levy	and  collect
     market fees from every buyer in respect of agricultural
     produce bought by such buyer in the market area at such
     rate as  may be  specified in the bye-laws (which shall
     not be  more than	one rupee  per hundred rupees of the
     price of  such produce  bought) in	 such manner  and at
     such  times as may be specified in the bye-laws;
     (3)  every market	committee  shall,  not	withstanding
     anything contained in this Act, credit to the Karnataka
     Roads and	Bridges Fund constituted under the Karnataka
     Motor Vehicles  Act, 1957	market fees  collected under
     sub-section (1)  for being	 spent	or  the	 purpose  of
     construction, repair,  improvement and  maintenance  of
     rural roads in the State."
     Market fee was levied on the sellers for the first time
under s. 65(1) as substituted and the entire collection made
under that  sub-section had  to be credited to the Karnataka
Roads and  Bridges Fund	 for being spent for the purposes of
construction, repair  improvement and  maintenance of  rural
roads in the State. Sub sections (1) and (3) of s. 65 of the
Act, as	 substituted by Amendment Act 24 of 1975 were struck
down on	 28 9.1978  by the  decision in Rajasekhariah's case
(supra). Subsequent to that decision s. 65 of
225
the principal Act as substituted by Amendment Act 24 of 1975
was amended by s. 20 of Amendment Act 17 of 1980 thus: A
	      "S. 20. Amendment of section 65.-In section 65
     of the principal Act,-
     (1)  for sub-section  (1),	 the  following	 sub-section
	  shall	 be   and  shall  be  deemed  to  have	been
	  substituted with effect from 19th day of May, 1975
	  namely:-
	       "(1) In	respect of  the agricultural produce
	  sold in  a market  area, there shall be levied and
	  collected by	the market  committee there of, from
	  every seller,	 market fees  at the rate of one per
	  cent of the sale proceeds of the produce so sold;
     (2)  Sub-section (1)  as so  substituted shall  be	 and
	  shall be  deemed to  have been omitted with effect
	  from the 23th day of September, 1978;
     (3)  in sub-section (2), for the words "one rupee", the
	  words "two rupees" shall be substituted;
     (4)  sub-section (3)  shall  be  and  shall  be  deemed
	  always to have been omitted."
     The result	 of the	 amendment was	that  the  levy	 and
collection  of	 market	 fees	on  and	  from	sellers	  of
agricultural produce  at One  per cent	of the	price of the
agricultural produce  sold  in	the  market  area  had	been
restricted to the period from 19.5.1975, the date on p which
Amendment Act  24 of 1975 which substituted the new s. 65 in
the place  of the  original section  65 came into force upto
28.9.1978, the	date on	 which the  substituted sub-sections
(1) and	 (3) of	 s. 65	were struck  down in Rajasekhariah's
case  (supra),	and  the  substituted  sub-section  (3)	 was
omitted by  Amendment Act  17 of 1980 as if it never existed
in the Statute. S. 42 of Amendment Act 17 of 1980 relates to
validation of market fees-etc. and reads:
	  "S. 42  Notwithstanding anything  contained in any
     decree, order  of	judgment  of  any  court,  or  other
     authority, any levy or collection of market fee made or
     purported to  have been made, any action taken or thing
     done in relation to such levy or collection under the
226
     provisions of the principal Act before the commencement
     A of  this section	 shall be  deemed to be as valid and
     effective as  if such  levy or  collection or action or
     thing had	been made, taken or done under the principal
     Act as amended by this Act and accordingly,-
     (a)  all acts,  proceedings or  things done  or  action
	  taken by  any market	committee in connection with
	  the levy  and collection of such market fee shall,
	  for all  purposes, be	 deemed to  be	or  to	have
	  always been made, done or taken in accordance with
	  law;
     (b)  no suit  or other  proceedings shall be maintained
	  or continued	in any court or before any authority
	  for the refund of any such market fee; and
     (c)  no  court   shall  enforce  any  decree  or  order
	  directing the refund of any such fee;
     ...	 ...	     .... "
     The market	 fee levied  on and  collected from  sellers
under the substituted s. 65(1) of the Act went to the credit
of the	Karnataka Roads	 and Bridges  Fund under sub-section
(3). Sub-section (3) had been omitted by Amendment Act 17 of
1980 as	 if it	never existed  in the  Statute as  mentioned
above. The  High Court,	 following this	 Court's decision in
Kewal Krishna  Puri's case (supra) has held that rural roads
are essentially	 and primarily	intended for  the benefit of
the public and the class of market fee payers as part of the
general public	is entitled to the benefit of their user and
the fee	 cannot be  levied on  and collected  from them	 for
being  spent   for  the	 purpose  of  construction,  repair,
improvement and	 maintenance of	 such roads, more so because
rural roads,  even if  constructed,  repaired,	improved  or
maintained from	 the market  fee collected under the Act, do
not become  the property  of the  Market Committees and shed
their character	 as public roads. Expenditure of market fees
for construction  of roads,  main or rural, is impermissible
in view	 of  the  decision  in	Kewal  Krishan	Puri's	case
(supra), and  even s  65(3) has	 been omitted as if it never
existed	 in   the  Statute  after  it  was  struck  down  in
Rajasekhariah's case  (supra). The quid pro quo for the levy
under substituted  s 65(1)  on sellers was the construction,
repair, improvement  and maintenance of rural roads which is
no longer permissible
227
to be  done out of moneys collected as market fees. there is
thus no	 quid pro quo to any existent for the levy under the
substituted s. 65(1) of the Act and therefore, it fails, and
it is not protected even by s. 42 of the Amendment Act 17 of
1980 and  has been rightly struck down by the High Court. S.
42 of  the Amendment Act 17 of 1980 in so far as it seeks to
save the  levy and collection of market fee on sellers under
the substituted	 s. 65(1)  cannot also stand. The High Court
is, therefore,	right in  its finding  on this aspect of the
case.
 In the  Act there	is no  provision in  regard  to	 the
market fee  like s.  23A of  the Punjab	 Agricultral Produce
Markets Act sub-section (1) thereof reads thus:
	  "Notwithstanding   anything	contained   in	 any
     judgment, decree  or order	 of any	 court it  shall  be
     lawful for	 a market committee to retain the fee levied
     and collected  by it  from a licensee in excess of that
     leviable under  s. 23  if the  burden of  such fee	 was
     passed on	by the licensee to the next purchaser of the
     agricultural produce  in respect  whereof such  fee was
     levied and collected."
     In Civil  Appeals Nos.  45()0-4501 of  1984 decided  on
19.11.1984 this	 Court has  held that  what s.	23A  of	 the
Punjab Act  does is to prevent unjust enrichment by means of
a refund  to which  the person	claiming it  has no moral or
equitable entitlement. The market fee collected from sellers
under the  substituted s.  65(1) must  have been credited to
the Karnataka  Roads and  Bridges  Fund	 and  used  for	 the
purpose of construction, repair, improvement and maintenance
of rural  roads which are undoubtedly for the benefit of the
general public.	 The excess  fee collected under s. 65(2) of
the Act	 also must  have  been	utilised  for  the  purposes
contemplated by	 the Act.  The persons	from whom  they have
been collected,	 sellers and  buyers, would  naturally	have
passed on  the levy  to those who purchased the agricultural
produce from  them and	the levy  must have  ultimately been
borne by  the consumers	 of the produce. Any refund would go
to unjust enrichment of the persons from whom they have been
collected. In  these circumstances  I do  not think that any
order for  refund of  the market  fee  collected  under	 the
substituted s.	65(1) and  the excess  market fee  collected
under s. 65(2) of the Act could be made in these cases .
228
To summarise, my findings are:
	  (1) S.  65  (1)  of  the  Act	 as  substituted  by
     Amendment Act  24 of 1975 and Act 17 of 1980, and s. 42
     of Amendment  Act 17  of 1980  in so for as it seeks to
     save that	has been done under s. 65 (1) of the Act are
     unconstitutional and  have been  rightly struck down by
     the High Court;
	  (2) Enhancement of the rate of market fee leviable
     under s.  65 (2)  of the  Act by amendments of the bye-
     laws from	one per	 cent to two percent of the price of
     the notified agricultural produce is invalid in law for
     non-compliance with  the law laid down in Kewal Krishan
     Puri's case (supra);
	  (3)  There   is   no	 correlation   between	 the
     enhancement of  the rate  of the  market  fee  leviable
     under s.  65(2) from  one per  cent to two per cent and
     the services rendered or proposed to be rendered by the
     Market Committees	and, therefore,	 the enhancement  is
     invalid in law;
	  (4) Amendment of the bye-laws made for enhancement
     of the  rate the market fee leviable under s. 65 (2) of
     the Act from one per cent to two per cent is invalid in
     law;
	  (5) The provisions of the Act are repugnant to the
     Tobacco Board  Act, 19,6  and,  therefore,	 tobacco  is
     liable to be removed from the schedule; and
	  (6) There  shall be  no refund  of the market fees
     collected under  the substituted  s. 65  (1) of excesss
     fee collected  under s.  65 (2)  either  by  the  State
     Government or by any of the Market Committees.
     The appeals, writ petitions and special leave petitions
are disposed of accordingly. The Market Committees shall pay
costs of  Rs. 15,000  to  the  parties	represented  by	 Mr.
Sorabjee and  Rs. 10,000  to the  parties represented by Mr.
Kacker.
      SABYASACHI  MUKHARJI, J.	Some Writ petitions out of a
large number of petitions, nearly 4298 in number arising out
of The Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation)
Act, 1966  (hereinafter referred  to as the 'Act') were take
up by the High
229
Court of Karnataka for hearing and disposed of by one common
judgment  as  one  or  more  of	 the  contentions  in  those
petitions were	A common,  and all  the petitions were heard
together by  the High  Court of	 Karnataka so  as to  afford
opportunities to  learned counsel  appearing in the cases to
address arguments.  These were disposed of by a common order
which was  representative of  the contentions  urged at	 the
hearing of  the argument. The learned judges directed B that
the remaining writ petitions which had been heard along with
those cases  would be  disposed of,  in convenient  batches,
following the  findings on  the various contentions recorded
in that order.
     These appeals  arise out  of the  said order.  In these
appeals we  were concerned with the provisions of the Act as
well as	 (1) the challenge to the constitutional validity of
section 65  (1) of  the Act  as substituted by The Karnataka
Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) (Amendment) Act,
1980 (hereinafter  referred to	as the (Amending Act') which
sought to  validate the market fee levied on the "sellers of
notified agricultural produce" under section 65 (1), for and
during the  period of  its operation,  prior  to  its  being
struck down by the Karnataka High Court in Rajasekhariah' v.
Tiplur Agrl.  Produce Marketing	 Committee &  Anr.(l) (2) to
the enhancement	 of market fee from 1% to 2% effected by the
various Market	Committees by  amending the  bye-laws  after
permissible maximum  levy of  the fee  on the  buyers  under
section 65 (2) was raised to 2 per cent by the said Amending
Act, the  challenge  being  both  on  the  ground  that	 the
amendment of bye-laws was made in violation of the mandatory
requirements  of   prior  publication	and  prior  sanction
contemplated by	 section 148  and on  the  ground  that	 the
enhancement of	fees fail  for want of quid-pro-quo; and (3)
to the	inclusion of  certain items  such as wood, cardamom,
sugarcane, tobacco  in	the  list  of  notified	 agricultral
produce incorporated in the Schedule to the Act.
     On 1st  May, 1968,	 the Act came into force. Section 65
of  the	  Act  as   originally	stood  directed	 the  Market
Committees to  levy and	 collect Market fees from the buyers
in respect of agricultural produce by-
     (i) any trader or other person in the yard, and
     (1) 19791 Karnataka L.J. p. 43.
230
     (ii) any trader outside the market or sub-market in tho
     A market area.
 Section 65 of the Act was amended on 20th October, 1973
by The	Karnataka Act No. 20 of 1973 raising the maximum fee
leviable by a Market Committee from 30 paise to one rupee.
     On the  17th December,  1974, the	enhancement  of	 the
market fee  from 30 paise to one rupee made by the amendment
of the	bye laws  by  some  of	the  Market  Committees	 was
challenged by the traders-buyers of the agricultural produce
before the  High Court of Karnataka in Writ Petition No. 537
of 1974 and the connected writ petitions in the case of K.S.
Vaman Rao v. The Agricultral Produce Market Committee. Sagar
and the High Court by its judgment dated 17th December, 1974
held that  the levy  authorised by  the section	 was in	 the
nature of  a fee  and after  scrutinising  the	estimate  of
expenditure of	each of	 the Market Committees spread over a
period of 15 years and the amount recoverable by way of fees
thereto held that there was correlation between the services
rendered and the amount of fees collected.
     On	 19th	May,  1975,   section  65  of  the  Act	 was
substituted by	a new  section (Act  No. 24  of	 1975).	 The
substituted section reads as follows:-
	  "65. Levy of Market Fees-(1) The Market Commit tee
     shall levy and collect market fees from every seller in
     respect of	 agricultural produce sold by such seller in
     the market	 area at  the rate  of	one  rupee  per	 one
     hundred Rupees of the price of such produce sold.
	  (2) The  Market Committee  shall levy	 and collect
     market fees from every buyer in respect of agricultural
     produce bought  by such  buyer in	the market  areas at
     such rate as may be specified in the bye-laws (which of
     such produce  bought) in  such manner and at such times
     as may be specified in the bye-laws.
	  (3) Every  Market Committee shall, notwithstanding
     anything contained in this Act, credit to the Karnataka
     Motor Vehicles  Taxation Act,  1957,  the	market	fees
     collected under sub-section (1) for being spent for the
231
     purpose  of   construction,  repair,   improvement	 and
     maintenance of rural roads in the State."
 By Act  No. 14  of 1976  passed on	 24th January,	1976
which replaced	and earlier  Ordinance. section	 65 (1)	 was
amended by  insertion of  a proviso  to section	 65  (1)  as
under:-
	  "Provided that  the State Government may, by order
     in public	interest, exempt  any Market  Committee from
     such levy and collection in respect of any agricultural
     produce."
     On 1st  June, 1976, by the Amending Act No. 43 of 1976,
the following changes were made:-
     (a)  By  section  2  of  the  amending  Act,  the	word
	  "MARKETING" was  substituted for the words "buying
	  and selling" in the long title to the Act.
     (b)  By section  (3) of  the  amending  Act,  the	word
	  'MARKETING" was  substituted for the words "buying
	  and selling" in the preamble to the Act.
     (c)  By section (4) of the amending Act a new clause 18
	  (A) was inserted as under:-
	     "18 (A) "Marketing" means buying and selling of
	  agricultural	 produce   and	 includes   grading,
	  processing, storage,	transport, packaging, market
	  information and channels of distribution.
     "On or  about 1978	 judgment was  delivered by the High
Court of  Karanataka in	 the case of Rajasekhariah v. Tiptur
Agricultural Produce  Marketing Committee  and Anr. (supra).
By the	said judgment, the High Court struck down section 65
(1) and	 (3) of	 the  Act  which  authorised  the  levy	 and
collection of  market fee  on the  sellers  of	agricultural
produce, and  the High	Court  in  the	said  judgment	also
considered the	levy of market fee at the rate of 1 per cent
on  the	 buyers	 of  the  agricultural	produce	 levied	 and
collected by  certain Market Committees and upheld such levy
on the	buyers of agricultural produce following the earlier
judgment dated	17th December,	1974  in  Vaman	 Rao's	case
mentioned hereinbefore,
272
     On or  about the  30th June,  1979 Ordinance  No. 2 was
promulgated which brought about the following changes:-
     (a)  Section 63  of the Act which deals with powers and
	  duties of  the Market	 Committees was amended with
	  retrospective	 effect	 from  19-5-1975  so  as  to
	  provide that	in clause (ii) of sub-section (1) of
	  section 63,  the words  "Transport and  Marketing"
	  shall be  substituted for  the word "Marketing" in
	  the said  clause. Clause (ii) of sub-section(l) of
	  section 63 was amended to provide for "it shall be
	  the duty  of the  Market Committee to provide such
	  facilities  for   transport	and   marketing	  of
	  agricultural produce therein".
     (b)  In sub-section (2) of section 63 of the Act and in
	  clause (a)  thereto, the  following  was  inserted
	  after item (1):
	       "(ia) Provide  either independently  or along
	  with some other authority necessary facilities for
	  the transport	 of notified agricultural produce to
	  the yard in such manner as may be prescribed."
     (c)  Section 65  of the  Act was amended to provide for
	  the following consequences:
	  (i)  The Market fee levied and collected under sub
	       section (1) of section 65 of the Act for the
	       period 19-5-1975 to 28-9-1978 was validated.
	  (ii) Sub-section (1)	of section  65 was deemed to
	       have been omitted with effect from 28-9-1978.
	  (iii)Sub-section (2)	of section  65	of  the	 Act
	       providing for  the levy	of Market fee on the
	       buyers  of   the	 agricultural	produce	 was
	       amended by  enhancing the maximum permissible
	       levy there to from 1 per cent to 2 per cent.
	  (iv) Sub-section (3)	of section  65	of  the	 Act
	       which dealt  with the crediting of the Market
	       fee levied  and collected  under	 sub-section
	       (1) was always deemed to have been omitted.
233
     Pursuant to the amendment of sub-section (2) of section
65 of  the Act	enhancing the  maximum Market  fee  leviable
thereto A  from I  per cent  to 2  per cent,  all the Market
Committees in  the State  (except that of Mangalore) amended
the bye-laws by enhancing the Market fee leviable under sub-
section (2)  of section	 65 of	the Act from 1 per cent to 2
per cent  and on  such enhancement  of the market fee from I
per cent  to 2	per cent,  all the buyers-traders filed writ
petitions before  the High Court assailing the said enhanced
levy.
     By Karnataka Ordinance No. 14 of 1979, on 2nd November,
1979, the  earlier Ordinance, namely Ordinance No. 2 of 1979
was  repealed.	Another	 Ordinance  on	the  same  lines  as
Ordinance No.  2 of  1979 was  promulgated on  3rd November,
1979. On  9th May,  ]980,  Karnataka  Act  No.	17  of	1980
containing the	same changes  were brought as noticed in the
ordinance mentioned before.
     Hearing of	 these writ  petitions before the High Court
commenced in  October-November, 1981. Section 148 of the Act
was amended by Karnataka Ordinance No. 22 of 1981 during the
hearing of  these writ	petitions and  by the said Ordinance
the  conditions	 of  previous  publication  contemplated  in
section 148  of the  Act was  dispensed	 with  retrospective
effect.	 We   shall  have  to  advert  to  these  provisions
subsequently.
     Judgment was  delivered by	 the High Court of Karnataka
on 25th	 January, 1982	in these  writ petitions. Thereafter
the rate  of market  fee payable under section 65 (2) of the
Act was	 reduced from  2 per  cent to  I per cent by all the
market committees  by Circular dated 27th February, 1984. As
mentioned hereinbefore,	 these appeals	challenge  the	said
judgment.
     Several contentions were urged before the learned trial
judge and  some of these contentions were pressed before us.
One of	the questions  posed was,  whether section 65 (1) of
the Act (as substituted by the Amending Act 17 of 1980) read
with section  42 of  the said  Amending Act  retrospectively
validating the	levy and  collection of	 market fees  on the
sellers at one per cent for the period between 19-5-1975 and
28-9-1978 was constitutionally valid. By the said
234
amending Act it was provided that the following sub-sections
shall A	 be deemed to have been substituted with effect from
19th May, 1975, namely:-
	  "(1) In  respect of  the agricultural produce sold
     in a  market area,	 there shall be levied and collected
     by the  market committee  thereof, from  every  seller,
     market fees  at the  rate of  one per  cent of the sale
     proceeds of the produce so sold;
	  (2) Sub-section (1) as so substituted shall be and
     shall be  deemed to  have been omitted with effect from
     the 28th day of September, 1978."
     It was  contended on  behalf of  the petitioners before
the High  Court that section 65 (l) as substituted by Act 17
of 1980 read with section 42 of the Amending Act, seeking to
validate the  collection of  market fee	 on  "sellers"	made
under the  old section	65 (1) was constitutionally invalid.
It must	 be kept  in view  that this  validation had  become
necessary  in	view  of  the  judgment	 of  this  Court  in
Rajasekharioh's case  (supra) striking down sub-sections (1)
and (3)	 of section  63 of  the Act as these then stood. The
present substituted  section 65	 (1) read with section 42 of
the Amending  Act sought  to  validate	the  collections  of
market fee  on sellers	made when the earlier section 65 (l)
was operative.
     The High  Court in	 the case  of  Rajasekhariah's	case
struck down section 65 (1) (3) on grounds as follows:
	  "(a) The  though the fees levied under sub-section
     (1)  of  section  65  were	 required  to  be  spent  on
     construction, repair,  improvement and  maintenance  of
     rural roads,  the construction or repair or improvement
     and maintenance  of Rural	roads was  not	one  of	 the
     obligatory functions of the Market committees under the
     Act; and  the construction	 and  maintenance  of  rural
     roads,  which  were  public  roads,  were	the  primary
     responsibility of	the State  and its instrumentalities
     such   as	 the   authorities   under   the   Karnataka
     Municipalities Act, 1976; Karnataka Municipalities Act,
     1964; etc.
235
	  (b)  Secondly,  having  regard  to  the  essential
     element in	 the concept  of fee  requiring some special
     benefit by A way of quid-pro-quo, "to flow to the class
     of persons	 on whom fee is levied, the construction and
     maintenance of  public  roads  could  not	be  said  to
     constitute or  provide any	 such special benefit to the
     payer of  the fee	who, as	 members of  the public were
     entitled to  the use  and benefit	of public  roads and
     that they	could not be compelled to pay a fee for what
     they, in common with the general public, were otherwise
     entitled to as of right."
     Pursuant to  the judgment	in Rajasekhariah's case, the
State was  exposed  to	the  liability	for  refund  of	 fee
collected for the period between 19-5-1975 when sub-sections
65 (1)	and (3)	 were introduced  by the  Amending Act 24 of
1975 and  28-9-1978 when the judgment was pronounced. By the
Act 17 of 1980, this levy was sought to be validated and the
fee retained by the State Government.
     After  discussing	 the  rival  submissions  and  after
discussing the	legal principles  and the  decisions in	 the
cases of  Misrilal Jain	 v. State of Orissa,(l) Shri Prithvi
Cotton	Mills	Ltd.  v.   Broach  Borough  Municipality,(2)
Ahmedabad Corporation  v. New  Shirock	Spg.  and  Wvg.	 Co.
Ltd.,(8)  I.N.	 Saxena	 v.   State  of	  M.P.,(4)  and	 the
Commissioner, Hindu  Religious	Endowments,  Madras  v.	 Sri
Lakshmindra Thirtha  Swamiar of Sri Shirur Mutt,(5) the High
Court of  Karnataka  distinguished  fee	 and  tax  and	then
referred to  the case  of Kewal	 Krishan Puri  v.  State  of
Punjab.(") Reliance  was also  placed on the observations of
this Court  in Southern	 Pharmaceuticals  and  Chemicals  v.
State of  Kerala(7) and	 then the  Court addressed itself to
the question  whether construction  of rural roads for which
fee was	 levied on  the sellers	 can be said to be a special
service primarily  and directly	 intended for the benefit of
the class which paid the fee.
(1) A.I.R.1977 S.C.1686.
(2) A.I.R.1970 S.C.192.
(3) A.I R. 1970 S.C. 1292.
(4) A.I.R. 1976 S.C.2250.
(5) A.I.R. 1954 S.C.282.
(6) A I. R.1980 S.C. 1008.
(7) A.I.R.1981 S.C.1863.
236
     After  discussing	several	 decisions,  Karnataka	High
Court felt  that the  second major defect noticed in the law
in the	case of Rajasekhariah's case namely the construction
of rural  roads could  not qualify  for	 being	reckoned  as
special service to a class of persons paying the fee had not
been cured  or removed	by the	law which sought to validate
the levy and in view of these circumstances,
 the  Court came  to the  conclusion that  section 5  (1) as
substituted by	section 20 of the Amending Act 17 of 1980 as
well  as   section  42	 of  the   Amending  Act   was	 not
constitutionally valid and was liable to be struck down.
     As	 mentioned  before  several  other  contentions	 and
submissions
 were urged before the learned trial Judge but before us the
following main submissions were urged:
     (1) There was no quid-pro-quo between the imposition of
fees and  the services	rendered,  (2)	In  so	far  as	 the
Amending Act  17  of  1980  sought  to	validate  the  taxes
realised following  the defects mentioned in Rajasekhariah's
case valid  or not, and, if not, whether the appellants were
entitled to  refund of	any amount  ? (3)  Is imposition  of
market fee  on Tobacco	valid ?	 (4) Is	 the deletion of the
provisions for	previous publication  in section  148 proper
and valid ?
     I will,  however, notice  the other contentions briefly
raised in those writ petitions.
	  It was contended that the Act as amended by Act 17
so far as marketing of cardamom was concerned, was repugnant
to  The	 Cardamom  Act.	 1965.	The  High  Court  held	that
Karnataka Legislature  was not entitled to impose market fee
so far as cardamom was concerned. It may be noted before the
High Court  that the  inclusion of  cardamom in	 the Act was
contended to  be bad in view of entry 52 of List I and entry
33  of	List  III  but	it  appears  the  question  was	 not
considered in  the light  of entry 52 of List I and entry 28
of List	 II in	the present  case. The	High Court, further,
found that  the rules  framed under the Cardamom Act were at
variance with  the present  Act. So  far as  sugar-cane	 was
concerned it was held that sugarcane was outside the pale of
the present Act. The Government has not appealed against the
findings so  far as cardamom was concerned. In so far as the
High Court held that
237
sugarcane was  outside the  pale of  the  Act,	no  argument
impugning that finding was canvassed before us.
     It was  for the  first time  by the  Amending Act 17 of
1980 that  tobacco was enumerated as an agricultural produce
for the purpose of the Act. It may be borne in mind that the
Amending Act  17 of  1980  for	the  first  time  enumerated
tobacco for  the purpose  of the "Act". The amending Act was
not reserved for the consideration of the President.
     On a  consideration of  the provisions  of the  Tobacco
Board Act,  1975  and  the  present  Act,  after  discussing
various contentions,  the High	Court held that there was no
repugnancy and conflict as between the provisions of Tobacco
Board Act, 1975 and the present Act.
     One of the main contentions urged before the High Court
and reiterated before us was whether the Act in so far as it
provided  for	regulating  the	  marketing  of	 tobacco  is
unconstitutional as  being repugnant  to the Central Act and
on the	same topic  marketing of  tobacco  is  regulated  by
Tobacco Board  Act, 1975.  It should  be borne	in mind that
there was  a declaration  under section 2 of the Central Act
namely Tobacco	Board Act, 1975 pursuant to entry 52 of List
I regarding tobacco. It was contended that tobacco after the
declaration under  section 2 of the Tobacco Board Act became
part of	 entry 52  of List  I and it was submitted that once
the declaration has made, any legislation by the State after
such declaration  trenching upon  the field disclosed in the
declaration must  necessarily  be  unconstitutional  because
that field  or area according to the appellants was excluded
from the  legislative competence  of the  State Legislature.
Entry 52 of List I reads as follows:-
	  "Industries, the  control of which by the Union is
     declared by  Parliament by	 law to	 be expedient in the
     public interest."
     There has	been a	declaration by	the Union  that	 the
control of  tobacco industry  has been	taken over in public
interest. Thereafter  Tobacco Board Act, 1975 being Act 4 of
1975 was passed for the development under the control of the
Union of  the tobacco  industry. Chapter  II of the said Act
deals with  the establishment and constitution of the Board.
Section 7 permits the Board to appoint committees
238
as might  be necessary	for the	 efficient discharge  of its
duties and  A performance  of its  functions under  the Act.
Sub-section (2)	 of section  7 enjoins	that the Board shall
have powers  to co-opt	members. Section  8 of	the  Tobacco
Board Act,  1975 deals	with the  functions of the Board and
empowers by  sub-section (1)  of section  8 of	the  Tobacco
Board the  duty to  promote, by	 such measures	as it thinks
fit, the  development  under  the  control  of	the  Central
Government of  the  tobacco  industry.	Sub-section  (2)  of
section	  of the  said Act  lays down different functions of
the Board  and, inter alia, by clause (a) permits regulating
the production	and curing of virginia tobacco having regard
to the	demand therefor	 in India and abroad. Clause (cc) of
section 8 (2) empowers the Board as follows:
	  "establishment by  the Board of auction platforms,
     with the  previous approval  of the Central Government,
     for the  sale of  virginia tobacco by registered grower
     or	 curers,   and	functioning   of  the  Board  as  an
     auctioneer	 at   action  platforms	 established  by  or
     registered with it subject to such conditions as may be
     specified by the central Government."
 Section 10	 provides for registration of the growers of
virginia tobacco.  Section 13  provides that  no  registered
grower or  curer shall	sell or	 cause to  be sold  virginia
tobacco elsewhere  than at  an auction	platform registered.
with the  Board in accordance with the rules made under this
Act or	established by	the Board under this Act. Section 14
deals with  the application,  cancellation, fees  and  other
matters relating to registration. Section 14A deals with the
power to levy fees for the services rendered by the Board in
relation to  such sale	at such	 rate not  exceeding two per
cent of	 the value of such tobacco as the Central Government
may specify.
 Section  11  provides  that  no  person  other  than  a
registered curer  shall cure  or  undertake  the  curing  of
virginia tobacco unless he registers himself as a curer with
the Board in accordance with the rules made under the Act.
     Chapter V	deals with the control by Central Government
of import  and export of tobacco and tobacco products. There
are  provisions	  under	 section  21  for  the	issuance  of
directions by  the Central  Government and  by section 22 of
returns and reports.
239
Chapter VI  deals with	the penalties  and offences  by	 the
companies. Section  31 provides	 that the  provisions of the
said Act  shall be  in A  addition to, and not in derogation
of, the	 provisions of	any other  law for the time being in
force. Section	32 provides  for the  power of	the  Central
Government to  make rules.  Section I  provides that the Act
will come  into force on such date as the Central Government
may by	notification in	 the Official  Gazette	appoint	 and
proviso of  sub-section 1  empowers that different dates may
be appointed  for different  provisions of  the Act  and for
different States  or different	parts  thereof.	 Under	sub-
section (3)  of section	 I of  Tobacco Board  Act, 1975,  by
Notification dated  31st May,  1980, the  Central Government
appointed 31st	May, 1980  as the  date on which sections 10
and 11	would come  into force in the States of Maharashtra,
West Bengal, Gujarat, Tamil Nadu and Uttar Pradesh.
 Section 13	 of  the  Tobacco  Board  Act  is  important
because it  empowered that  no registered  grower  or  curer
shall sell  or cause  to be  sold virginia tobacco elsewhere
than at	 an auction  platform registered  with the  Board in
accordance with the rules made under the Act. There was some
confusion at the stage of the argument as to on what date it
has come  into force  or even  if it  has not specially come
into force  in the State of Karnataka, by the passing of the
Act  itself,  the  Center  has	sufficiently  expressed	 its
intention to occupy the field so as to exclude the operation
of any	activity by  the State.	 Our attention has, however,
been drawn to a Notification being Notification No. S. 0 665
(E) dated  31st August,	 1984 whereby section 13 of the said
Act came  into force  in the State of Karnataka from 1st day
of September,  1984. I	have already  noted the provision of
section 13  of the  said Act.  It may be mentioned that this
notification as such would be of no assistance to us because
this notification  came into  force subsequent	to the	writ
petitions and  after hearing in these matters was concluded.
It was	the contention	on behalf of the petitioners that by
declaration under  entry 52  of List I and by the passing of
the Act	 in question  i.e. Tobacco  Board Act, 1975, tobacco
became an  occupied field  of Central  Parliament and  would
prevail	 over	the  'Act'   irrespective  of  any  separate
notification making  Tobacco Board  Act, 1975, applicable to
the State  of Karnataka. In exercise of powers under section
32 of  Tobacco Board  Act, 1975	 the Central  Government was
empowered to  make rules.  These are  known as Tobacco Board
Rules,	1976.	Rule  33   of  chapter	 VII  provides	 for
registration of	 growers,  curers,  exporters,	packers	 and
auctioneers of, and dealers in tobacco,
240
     The High  Court was  of the  view that  unlike the	 law
governing A  the marketing  of Cardamom	 and Sugarcane,	 the
Tobacco Act  did not  cover the	 marketing of tobacco in its
entirety but only covered a part of the area of the topic of
marketing of  tobacco. According  to the  High Court the two
legislations could  co-exist and  operate cumulatively.	 The
High Court  was of  the	 view  that  any  intention  of	 the
superior legislature  to cover	the whole  field to  make  a
comprehensive law  with regard	to marketing  of tobacco was
not manifest  in the  legislation. The High Court noted that
it was	not disputed  during the  arguments  that  the	only
provision on  what might  be called  the area  of  marketing
covered under  the Tobacco  Act was  the one  requiring	 the
auctioneers of	tobacco to  hold a licence for establishment
of auction platforms. The High Court was of the view that as
long as	 the market  committees became such licensees, there
was no further requirement under the Tobacco Board Act which
could  be  said	 to  render  the  provisions  of  the  'Act'
regulating marketing  of tobacco  under the Act repugnant to
or irreconcilable.  It may  ,  however,	 be  noted  that  by
letters dated  15th September, 1983 and 23rd September, 1983
appearing at  pages 462	 and 466  of the  Paper Book, it was
pointed out  on behalf	of the petitioners before this Court
that the  market committees had not even upto that date been
registered under  the Tobacco  Board Act, 1975, in the first
letter written	to the	Market Committee  it was stated that
the market  J committee	 could	not  be	 given	registration
because these  lacked certain  necessary qualifications	 and
was therefore  incapable of  rendering any  service at	all.
Here it	 may have to be borne in mind that section 12 of the
Tobacco Board  Act, 1975 enjoins that no person shall export
tobacco or  any tobacco	 products or  function as  a packer,
auctioneer of,	or dealer  in, tobacco	unless he  registers
himself with  the Board	 in accordance	with the  rules made
under this Act.
     The High Court took the view that on the limited aspect
of marketing  provided for  Tobacco Board  Act, 1975 it only
made provisions	 in relation to virginia tobacco and not for
all varieties  of tobacco.  The High  Court therefore was of
the view  that the  provisions of the Act were not repugnant
to the	Tobacco Board  Act, 1975  and all that was necessary
for the market committees was to obtain auctioneer's licence
under the  provisions of  Tobacco Act  1 and'  or to get the
necessary  qualifications   so	as  to	be  able  to  obtain
necessary licence.  The High  Court came  to the  conclusion
that provisions	 of the Act in relation to the regulation of
tobacco were
241
not repugnant  to the Act. The High Court further noted that
neither the  Union of  India nor  the Tobacco Board had been
impleaded as  parties to  the writ  applications before	 the
findings on  these contentions	were strenuously  challenged
before us  on behalf  of the  appellants. On  behalf of	 the
appellants, it	was urged  that tobacco was covered by entry
52 of List I by virtue of the declaration under section 2 of
the Tobacco  Board Act,	 1975 namely the Central Government.
It was submitted that once a declaration had been made under
section	 2,   pursuant	to  Entry  52,	the  Parliament	 had
exclusive competence  to legislate  every aspect or activity
pertaining to tobacco and the State would have no competence
to legislate on that topic.
     Reference was  made to  the decision  in  the  case  of
Baijnath Kedia v. State of Bihar & Ors.(1)
     I need  not detain	 ourselves on  the permissibility of
the regulation	of marketing  of  cardamom  under  the	Act,
because the same was not canvassed before us.
     So far  as the  point relating  to 'wood'	and  'forest
produce' was  concerned, the High Court felt that this point
was concluded  by the  pronouncement of	 this Court  in	 Ram
Chandra Kailash	 Kumar & Co. v State of U.P.(2) In any event
we are	not concerned  with this controversy as the same was
not canvassed before us.
     lt was  contended that section 65(2) of the Act gave an
uncanalised and	 excessive power to the market committees in
the matter  of specifying  the rate  of fee. The upper limit
for the	 levy was  fixed at  2 per  cent. It  could only  be
related to  the notified  agricultural produce	sold in	 the
market. The  concept of	 fee is itself a further limitation-
The High Court therefore was unable to accept the submission
that section  65(2) was	 bad  for  excessive  delegation  of
legislative powers.
     It was  contended that  the bye-laws  were unreasonable
and without  proper criteria. Reliance was placed before the
High Court  on the  decision in the case of Maneka Gandhi v.
Union of India (3)
(1) [1970] 2 S.C.R. 100 at 113.
(2) A.l.R. 1980 S.C. 1124.
(3) A.l.R. 1978 S.C. 597,
242
and Ajay  Hasia etc.  v. Khalid Mujib Sehravardi & Ors. etc.
(1).  The   A  High  Court  has,  however,  found  that	 the
legislative measure  could not	be invalidated on the ground
that the  relevant criteria was not shown to have been taken
into account  in making the legislation. Reliance was placed
in Tulsipur  Sugar Co.	v. Notified Area Committee, Tulsipur
(2) and	 in the	 said case on the observations of Megary, J-
in  rates  v.  Lord  Hailsham  of  St.	Marylebone  (3)	 the
following effect:
	  "...... Let me accept that in the sphere of the so
     called quasi judicial the rules of natural justice run,
     and that in the administrative or executive field there
     is a  general duty	 of  fairness.	Nevertheless,  these
     consecrations do  not seem	 to me to affect the process
     of legislation  whether primary  or delegated.  Many of
     those affected  by delegated  legislation, and affected
     very substantially,  are never consulted in the process
     of enacting  that legislation;  and yet  they  have  no
     remedy .. ."
     I am  in respectful  agreement with the aforesaid view.
It may further be noted that a minister or any other body in
making legislation  was not  subject  to  rules	 of  natural
justice. See  in  this	connection  Prof.  Wade's  'Judicial
Review of  Administrative Action ', 4th Edn. page 185 at 192
(De Smith).  Though we	are in	general agreement  with	 the
aforesaid view,	 the High  Court, however,  did	 not  detain
itself on this point because the High Court, was of the view
that the  fixation of  market fee was challenged not because
the persons  concerned were  not heard but because there was
no quid pro quo.
     The High  Court felt that the challenge to the doctrine
of ultra  vires on  the	 basis	that  hearing  of  interests
affected was  an imperative  requirement, not  in compliance
with rules  of natural justice but as a duty implicit in the
nature of  the power.  Section 148(1)  of  the	Act,  as  it
originally stood  provided that	 a  market  committee  could
frame bye-laws	after previous publication in the prescribed
manner and  also with  the previous  sanction of  the  Chief
Marketing Officer.  The contention  was	 that  no  procedure
having been prescribed by the
(1) A.l.R. 1981 S.C. 487.
(2) A.l.R. 1980 S.C. 882.
(3) [1972] I W.L.R. 1371.
243
rules, the  concepts implicit  in previous  publication	 and
incorporated in	 section 23 of the General Clauses Act, 1897
were attracted.	 It was	 A urged  that	there  had  been  no
compliance with	 the requirement  of previous  sanction	 and
publication contemplated  in this  section. As the narration
of events  indicated before,  an  Ordinance  was  introduced
namely Karnataka  Ordinance No. 22 of 1981 during the period
when the  arguments in	these cases  were coming  to a close
before	the  High  Court.  The	amendment  sought  to  amend
sections 137,148  and 158 of the principal Act. By section 3
of the	Ordinance which amended section 148 of the principal
Act, the words "after previous publication in the prescribed
manner" occurring in section 148(1) of the principal Act had
been deleted  with retrospective  effect i. e. from the date
of commencement of the Act itself. It was contended that the
requirement of	hearing of interests affected was not merely
a procedural  requirement of  Section 148  of the Act but an
exercise inherent  in the  exertion of	power  of  delegated
legislation. The very concept of 'fee' and the determination
of its extent and incidence by subordinate legislation would
require for  its reasonable  exercise an opportunity for the
interests affected being heard, it was submitted.
     On behalf	of the Market-committees and the Government,
it was	contended that	on a  proper construction of section
65(2) of  the Act,  such an  implication of  a duty  to hear
affected interests  did not  at all  arise. Any	 argument of
such a statutory implication could not survive the amendment
made by	 Ordinance of  17th December,  1981 which,  in turn,
clearly took away the obligation of prior hearing.
     The High  Court was of the opinion that the authorities
relied on  before  it  indicated  that	the  opportunity  of
consultation and hearing P of affected interests were merely
informal and  extra-judicial. The High Court referred to the
observations in	 Wade's Administrative	Law and	 referred to
certain decisions.
     The High  Court was  of the  view that persons affected
did not	 have any  right to  be heard  before the  statutory
rules or  bye-laws were	 made unless the right was conferred
by the statutes.
     The High  Court ultimately	 came to the conclusion that
in the	batch of  cases, this  was not of much importance on
the ground  that  by  specific	and  express  provisions  of
section 5  (a) of  the amending	 Ordinance  which  validated
these  bye-laws	  notwithstanding  the	fact  that  affected
interest were not heard in any manner.
244
     The Advocate-General  stated before the High Court that
A though  there was  no obligation,  it would  be  eminently
desirable to  consult or  ascertain the	 views of  those who
would be  affected and	the High  Court, therefore, observed
that before  a market-committee	 proposed to amend a bye-law
to make	 an upward  revision of	 rate of fee, in future, the
market committee  could follows the directions of this Court
in Kewal  Krishan Puri's  case and the High Court, suggested
certain means.	Ultimately,  the  High	Court  came  to	 the
following conclusions:
	  (a) Section  65(2) of	 the Act  did not  confer an
     unguided, arbitrary  power and  there was	no excessive
     delegation	 of   legislative  power   to  the   market-
     committees and therefore not vitiated on that account;
	  (b)  The   question	whether,   upon	  a   proper
     construction, section  65(2) must	be held	 to imply an
     obligation on the part of the market committees to hear
     affected interested  parties before the rate of fee was
     fixed, was	 left open with certain observations made in
     that judgment.
	  (c) The contention that challenged the bye-law for
     want of  previous sanction	 under section 148(1) of the
     Act was not accepted.
     It had  been contended before the High Court that there
was discrimination  on the ground that there was levy of the
same rate  of fee  on all  types of  produce. The High Court
repelled this  contention relying  mainly on the decision of
this Court  in the  case of  Ganga Sagar Corporation Ltd. v.
The State of Uttar Pradesh and Others.(1)
	   One of the main contentions urged before the High
Court was  that there  was no  quid-pro-quo. The  High Court
examined this  contention  with	 reference  to	the  factual
details.
	 The High court referred to the decision in the case
of  Kewal   Krishan  Puri  (supra)  and	 observed  that	 the
following seven principles were laid down by this Court:
     (1)  The amount  of fee realised must be ear-market for
	  rendering  services	to  the	  licensees  in	 the
	  notified
     (1) A.I.R. 1980 286.
245
	  market area  and a good and substantial portion of
	  it must be shown to be expanded for this purpose.
     (2)  The services	rendered to the licensees must be in
	  relation to  the transactions	 of purchase or sale
	  of the agricultural Produce.
     (3)  While rendering  services in	the market  area for
	  the purpose  of facilitating	the transactions  of
	  purchase and sale with view to achieve the objects
	  of the  marketing legislation	 it is not necessary
	  to  confer   the  whole  of  the  benefit  on	 the
	  licensees  but   some	 special  benefits  must  be
	  conferred on	them which  have a direct, close and
	  reason- able correlation between the licensees and
	  the transactions.
     (4)  While conferring  some  special  benefits  on	 the
	  licensee, it is permissible to render such service
	  in the market which may be in the general interest
	  of all  concerned with  transactions taking placed
	  in the market.
     (5)  While spending  the amount  of market fees for the
	  purpose of  augmenting the  agricultural  produce,
	  its facility	to  transport  in  villages  and  to
	  provide   other   facilities	 meant	 mainly	  or
	  exclusively for  the benefit of the agriculturists
	  is  not   permissible	 on  the  ground  that	such
	  services in the long run go to increase the volume
	  of transaction in the market ultimately benefiting
	  the traders  also. Such  an  indirect	 and  remote
	  benefit to  the traders  is in  no sense a special
	  benefit to them.
     (6)  The element of quid-pro-quo may not be possible or
	  even necessary to be established with arithmetical
	  exactitude but even broadly and reasonably it must
	  be established  by the  authorities who charge the
	  fees that  the amount is being spent for rendering
	  services to  those on whom falls the burden of the
	  fee.
     (7)  At least  a good  and substantial  portion of	 the
	  amount collected on account of fees, may be in the
246
	  neighbourhood of  two-thirds or three-fourths must
	  be shown  with reasonable certainty as being spent
	  for rendering services of the kind noted before.
     The High  Court by	 an order  dated 30th November, 1981
had directed  the Chief	 Marketing  Officer  to	 furnish  in
respect	 of   each  marketing	committees  a  comprehensive
statement in  a tabulation  from setting out certain factors
which were  relevant for  determination	 of  this  question.
These factors  have been  mentioned in	the judgment  of the
High Court.  Such statements or similar statements were duly
filed.
     The High  Court noted  that out of 33 market committees
which  were   involved,	 2   were  tobacco  markets.  Market
committees   whose    routine	recurring   annual   revenue
expenditure was	 somewhere in the nature of 45 to 60% of the
market-fee receipt  formed one	group. The  High Court	felt
that in	 the case  of these  market committees	even  though
revenue	 expenditure  did  not	sufficiently  establish	 the
requisite degree of correlation. It was reasonable to assume
that  having   regard  to   the	 extent	 of  infrastructural
facilities available  in most  of the  modest allocations on
future development work of non-controversial kind will bring
about the  correlation required	 to pass  the test of market
fee.
     The High  Court observed  that  the  market  committees
where  the  routine  recurring	annual	revenue	 expenditure
itself was  over 60% of the receipts of the market-fee at 2%
thereby established  a broad and substantial correlation. In
the case  of these  markets, the  High Court  felt  that  no
further investigation was required.
     In	 this	class  of  cases  were	included  33  market
committees. Their  names are  tabulated at  page 140  of the
High Court  judgment (page  314 of  the Paper  Book).  These
market committees were classed as Category 'A'.
     The High  Court at page 315 of the Paper Book (page 141
of the	judgment) tabulated other markets and the High Court
felt  that   in	 case	of  those   markets,  estimates	 for
developmental work  need not  also be  subjected  to  minute
examination. These  markets were  16 in number and mentioned
in the judgment of the High Court namely, (1) Doddaballapur,
(2) Gubbi, (3) Sira, (4) Jamkhandi, (5) Kundgoi.
247
(6) Laxmeshwar, (7) Siruguppa, (8) Aurad, (9) Gulbarga, (10)
Nalwar, (11)  Shorapur, (12)  Yadgir,  (13)  Yelburga,	(14)
Kollegal, (15)	Bhadravati and	(16 Manvi. These are classed
as Category 'B'.
     The next  category was  market committees whose routine
annual	revenue	  expenditure  plus   proposed	outlays	  on
infrastructural	  and	developmental	works	which	were
indubitably relatable  to services  to the  buyers showed  a
broad  correlation.  These  were  about	 14  in	 number	 and
mentioned at pages 142-143 of the judgment (pages 315-316 of
the Paper  Book). These	 market committees  were classed  as
Category C.
     In Category  'D', the  High Court mentioned ten markets
where  there  were  proposals  for  outlays  on	 account  of
permissible items of expenditure vis-a-vis the Buyers-fee.
     Then the  High Court in Category 'E' dealt with markets
whose I.  financial estimates  required to  be	individually
examined. These	 were the  regulated markets  of  Bangalore,
Hubli, Sagar,  Bijapur. Raichur, Gadag, Tiptur and Siddapur.
The High  Could was  of the  opinion that correlation of fee
and services  could not be reckoned on the basis of receipts
and expenditure for one or two years only.
     The High  Court noted  and in our opinion rightly, that
these regulated	 markets were  yet in developmental stage, a
stage which  should be	marked by  rapid growth. The initial
planning and  the infrastructure must be taken into account,
not only  potentialities for  growth and  expansion  in	 the
immediate near future but also long range possibilities. But
apart from  such basic	infrastructure,	 which	stood  on  a
different  footing,  the  benefit  of  utilitarian  projects
relatable to  and  developed  from  fee	 resources  must  be
available  to	the  payers  of	 the  fee  for	at  least  a
considerable part  of the  period, covered  by the financial
estimates and  projections. The High Court noted that if the
logic of  some of  the market  committees in this behalf, is
pushed to  its logical	or illogical conclusions, would mean
that the  present generation  of fee-payers  would  pay	 for
services  which	  would	 only	be  available  to  the	next
generation The	High Court  was of the view that levy of fee
could not  be justified on such wholly prospective services.
The High  Court, however,  was of  the view  that during the
period	of  execution  of  the	works  particularly  at	 the
formative stages  of the  markets the  actual benefit of the
services
248
might not be available to the payers of the fees; but if the
execution A  of the  work is so planned as to apply over the
years in  future as to be incapable of providing any service
to the	class of  fee-payers  for  and	during	at  least  a
considerable part  of the  unit of  time-in these cases a 15
years' period  from 1974-75  to 1988-89	 fixed by the market
committees themselves then the concept of quid-pro-quo would
dwindle down  to something  which could not be characterised
as illusory..
     The High  Court then  dealt in detail with the category
of markets  mentioned herein before classed as Category 'E'.
It was	contended that	buyers of different kinds of produce
were differents,  therefore service  to one  kind of  buyers
would not  be service  to the  other kind  of  buyers.	Such
argument based on the dichotomy of service as between buyers
of different  kinds of goods for example, buyers of rice and
buyers of  vegetables, was  rightly   rejected by  the	High
Court.	Such  an  argument  ignored  practical	and  working
problems.
     On a  detailed examination of the factual position, the
High Court  was of  the view  that it should go by financial
projections made. These aspects were directed to be examined
by the	Chief Marketing Officer and the market committees in
terms of certain directions that the High Court gave which I
shall mention later.
     The High  Court, however, felt that on the basis of the
estimate as  these stood  the enhanced	levy  could  not  be
quashed.
     So far  as Hubli  market committee	 was concerned,	 the
High Court  dealt with it in detail. Amongst the items which
were specially	mentioned was  an item	of outlay of Rs. 150
lakhs proposed	for construction  of large  godowns,  second
item was of Rs. 60 lakhs for construction of shops and small
godowns; and  the third	 item was the proposed outlay on the
'museum' and the fourth item was the estimated outlay of Rs,
75 lakhs for acquisition of 466 acres of land.
     After detailed  examination of these projects, the High
Court was  of the  view that  the  market  committees  would
perhaps be  in a  position to  establish a broad and general
correlation of 66 per cent
249
On the	basis of  its present  proposals and  the High Court
came to the conclusion that these were not unreasonable.
     As mentioned  hereinbefore, there	was an outlay of Rs.
75 lakhs on the aquisition of land. The provisions of Rs. 75
lakhs was  a modest  estimate and it could not be said to be
unreasonable. So  far as the outlay on museum was concerned,
it was	an essential  amenity for dissemination of ideas and
it was therefore valid.
     The High  Court then  examined in detail the markets of
Sagar, Bijapur,	 Raichur, Tiptur,  Gadag and  Siddapur.	 The
High Court  for the  reasons recorded and taking all factors
into consideration  came to the conclusion that though there
was room for criticism, on the whole, however taking all the
relevant factors  into consideration  it could	not be	said
that the projections were unreasonable.
     I am  in agreement	 with the  High Court that there was
limitation on  the powers  of the  Court in a controversy of
this  nature.	In  ascertaining   whether   the   necessary
correlation between  the services  and fee  existed or	not,
what was  required to  be examined  was	 only  a  broad	 and
general correlation  not an  equivalence  with	arithmetical
accuracy and  precision. The Court was neither equipped for,
nor should it permit itself, the role of inspecting auditors
much less  should it  assume the  role of technical experts.
The other  aspect which	 should be borne in mind was that in
scrutinising the  items of  work and  services undertaken by
market committee, in case of this kind where the controversy
was confined  to the  existence of correlation. the exercise
was not	 whether the  items of	work should or should not be
undertaken  by	the  market  committees.  The  question	 was
somewhat different.  The courts	 merely examined whether the
outlays on  the concerned works and services qualified was a
special service vis-a-vis the 'Fee'.
     The High  Court as	 a result  of the  discussion of the
aforesaid markets  came to the conclusion that it was unable
to hold	 on the	 materials placed  before it  that the	levy
ought to  fail for  want of  quid-pro-quo.  However,  having
regard to  the infirmities  noticed in the estimates and the
financial projections of the proposed developmental works on
the  basis  of	which  the  enhancement	 was  sought  to  be
justified, they	 were unable  to say with any confidence and
without reservations  that the enhancement of fee, depending
as it did on those
250
estimates was  totally justified.  The High Court was of the
opinion A  that some  time bound program was necessary to be
given for  a second look at the estimates. At the invitation
of the	Advocate General  and the  counsel  for	 the  Market
Committee, the	High Court was of the opinion that there was
obvious scope and imperative need for giving some directions
and  the  High	Court  gave  certain  directions  which	 are
contained in  paragraphs 109  onwards of the judgment of the
High Court.  This part	of the	judgment  has  come  in	 for
criticism because  on behalf  of the petitioners/appellants,
it was	contended that	in fact the High Court had abandoned
its obligation	to come to a finding whether there was quid-
pro-quo or  not when  there was	 a challenge  on that point.
Therefore, it  was contended  that there was no quid-pro-quo
established in	respect of  these markets. On the other hand
it was	contended that	the  High  Court  did  come  to	 the
conclusion that	 there was  quid-pro-quo but  the High Court
gave certain directions which it was competent to give. This
position will be dealt with in this judgment later.
     The High Court came to the following conclusions
	  (a) that  the provisions  of section	65(1) of the
     Karnataka Agricultural  Produce Marketing	(Regulation)
     Act, ;966	and section  42 of  the Karnataka  Act 17 of
     1980 in  so far  as and  to the  extent these sought to
     validate the  levy of  market fee	on sellers  for	 the
     period between  19.5.1975 and  28.9.1978 were  declared
     unconstitutional and void;
	  (b) the  provisions of  the Karnataka Agricultural
     Produce Marketing	(Regulation) Act, 1966, in so far as
     these sought to provide for the regulation of marketing
     of cardamom was concerned, were held to be repugnant to
     the provisions of Cardamom Act, 1965:
	  (c) the provisions of the Karanataka	Agricultural
     produce Marketing	(Regulation) Act, 1966, in so far as
     these sougth to regulate the marketing of sugarcane was
     concerned, were  held to be repugnant to the provisions
     of the  Sugarcane (Control)  Order, 1956,	a  statutory
     order made under section 3 of the Essential Commodities
     Act, 1955;
251
	  (d) the  High Court  directed that Chief Marketing
     Officer should, within four months from the date of the
     A judgment	 of the	 High Court,  evolve and standardise
     specifications   and   norms   with   regard   to	 the
     infrastructural and  developmental requirements for the
     market-yards and  sub-market yards	 and communicate the
     same to  the market  committees in terms indicated. If,
     upon such	scrutiny, the market-fee under section 65(2)
     now being levied at 2 per cent was found, in respect of
     any market	 committee, to be excessive and without quid
     pro quo, the Chief marketing Officer should make orders
     under section  ] 5()  directing a suitable reduction in
     the quantum  of the market fee of the market-committees
     concerned.
     So far  as the  prayer for	 issue of mandamus directing
refund of  sellers'  market-fee	 paid  under  section  65(1)
sought	by  producer  sellers  and  trader-sellers  who	 had
earlier approached  the High  Court was	 concerned, the High
Court directed	that mandamus  should issue.  In so  far  as
producer-sellers  and	other  petitioners  who	 were  trade
sellers who  had paid sellers fee under section 65(1) of the
Act, a mandamus to the State Government and to the concerned
Market	Committees  was	 directed  to  be  issued  in  terms
indicated in the judgment of the High Court.
     With the  other directions of the High Court for refund
and otherwise, it is not necessary to detain ourselves..
     The following  broad questions were canvassed before us
for consideration in these appeals:
	  (1)  Whether	 the  government   and	the   market
     committees had  been able	to establish  that there was
     quid-pro-quo and  as such	levy of fee and the increase
     of fee  from 1 per cent to 2 per cent was justified? It
     may be mentioned that after this judgment, the levy was
     decreased from 2 per cent to I per cent again.
	  (2) Whether there could or should be refund of any
     of these amounts to any of the parties?
	  (3)  Whether	the  High  Court  had  come  to	 any
     definite conclusion  in respect  of  the  eight  Market
     Committees mentioned hereinbefore?
252
	  (4) Whether  the High	 Court had  abandoned its  A
     jurisdiction in  not coming  to a	definite  conclusion
     about the	required correlation to sustain quid pro quo
     for the imposition of market fees?
	  (5) Whether  the High	 Court was competent to give
     directions to  the Market	Committees in  the manner it
     had done?
	  (6) Whether  in respect  of marketing	 of tobacco,
     the State	Government  was	 entitled  to  legislate  or
     whether  in   view	 of   the  fact	 that  there  was  a
     declaration under	item 54	 of  List  I  of  the  VIIth
     Schedule, or  whether  the	 State	Legislature  had  no
     competence to  legislate on  this	point  as  such	 the
     impugned legislation was ultra-vires ?
	  (7) Whether  the amendment  of section  148 of the
     Act as  mentioned aforesaid  whereby the opportunity of
     previous publication was deleted was valid or not?
     It is  necessary now  to deal with the contentions that
arise in  these	 appeals  as  enumerated  hereinbefore.	 The
rationale and  the necessity  for the  imposition of fees in
contra-distinction of  'tax' have been recognised for a long
time.  Our   Constitution  has	recognised  the	 distinction
between 'taxes'	 and 'fees'.  Entry 66	of List	 II  of	 VII
Schedule  speaks   of  'fees'	in  respect  of	 the  matter
enumerated in  List It. Similarly, Entry 96 of List I of VII
Schedule speaks	 of fees' in respect of matters mentioned in
List 1.	 Entry 97  of List  I speaks  of 'tax'.	 The classic
distinction  between   the  two	  was  reiterated   in	 the
observations of J. Latham in the case of Matthews v. Chicory
Marketing Board (60 Commonwealth Law Report p. 263). A 'tax'
is a  compulsory exaction  of money  by public authority for
public purposes	 enforceable by	 law and  is not payment for
services rendered.  In the  case of  The Commissioner, Hindu
Religious  Endowments  Madras  v.  Sri	Lakshmindra  Thirtha
Swamiar of  Sri Shirur	Mutt.,(l) this court reiterated that
'the distinction  between a  tax and a fee lies primarily in
the fact  that a  tax is  levied as part of a common burden,
while a fee is a payment for a special benefit or
 __ privilege'.
(1) 119541 S.C.R. 1005,
253
     From time	to time	 in several  decisions the  need for
imposition  of	fees  by  the  market-committees  have	been
emphasised  and	  A  examined.	Rajamanner,  C.J.  and	T.L.
Venkatarama Aiyar, J. in the case of Kuttf Keya v. The State
of Madras(l)  dealt with  the marketing legislation and need
for the	 same and  referred  to	 the  report  of  the  Royal
Commission on  Agriculture in  India. The  decision  of	 the
Madras High  Court was	affirmed by  a Constitution Bench of
this Court  in the  case of  Arunachala Nadar  v.  State  of
Madras(2) where	 Subba Rao, J. referred to the background of
the marketing  legislation. It	is not	necessary to deal in
detail with the said decisions,
     Most of  these decisions were reviewed by this Court in
judging the  validity of  fees imposed	in the case of Kewal
Krishan Puri  (supra). Several	principals deduced  from the
decision in  Kewal  Krishan  Puri's  case  have	 been  noted
hereinbefore. Prior  thereto the  question was considered in
the case  of  Government  of  Andhra  Pradesh  v.  Hindustan
Machine Tools  Ltd.(3) which  was  noted  in  Kewol  Krishan
Purl's case.  Kewal Krishan  Puri's case  specifically noted
that the  element of quid pro quo might not possible of even
necessary to  be established  with  arithmetical  exactitude
even broadly  and reasonably  it must  be established by the
authority which	 charged the  fees that the amount was being
spent for  rendering services  to those	 on  whom  fell	 the
burden of  the fee.  At least  a good and substantial amount
collected on  account of  fees might be in the neighbourhood
of 2/3rd or 3/4th must be shown with reasonable certainty as
being spent  for rendering  services to	 those from whom the
fees are  realised. The	 Court, however,  noted	 that  while
conferring special  benefits to	 the licensees	or payers of
fees, it  was permissible  to render  other services  in the
market which  might  be	 in  the  general  interest  of	 all
concerned in  respect of transactions that take place in the
markets. Services  rendered  to	 the  licenses	must  be  in
relation to  the transactions of purchase or sale of produce
in the	market. It  is not necessary, however, to confer the
whole of  the benefit  on the  licensees  but  some  special
benefits must  be conferred  on them  which have  a  direct,
close, and  reasonable correlation between the licencees and
transactions. But  imposition of  fees for  general  benefit
like augmenting	 the agricultural  produce, its	 facility of
transport in villages and to provide other
(1) A.T.R. 1943 MAD 621.
(2) A.I.R. 1959 S.C. 300.
(3) [1975] Supp. S.C.R. 394.
254
facilities meant  mainly or  exclusively for  the benefit of
agriculturists A was not permissible on the ground that such
service in  the long run augmented the volume of transaction
in the	market ultimately  benefiting the  traders. Such and
indirect benefit  could not  be considered  to be sufficient
quid-pro-quo to justify imposition of market-fee.
     This question  was examined  in the  case of  H.H. Shri
Swamiji of  Shri Admar Mutt, etc. v. the Commissioner, Hindu
Religious &  Charitable Endowments  Department &  Ors(l) The
correlation was	 again reviewed	 in the decision in the case
of Ramesh  Chandra etc.	 v. State  o f	U  P.  etc.(2)	This
question was  again examined  by this  Court in	 the case of
Municipal Corporation  of Delhi	 and Others  v. Mohd. Yasin.
(3) There  this Court  reiterated that	the mere  fact there
others besides those paying the fees were also benefited did
not detract from the character
 of the fee. Tn fact the special benefit or advantage to the
payers of  the fees might even be secondary as compared with
the primary motive of regulation in the public interest. The
Court was  not	expected  to  assume  the  role	 of  a	cost
accountant. It	is neither  necessary nor expedient to weigh
too meticulously  the cost  of the  services  rendered	etc.
against the amount of fees collected so as to evenly balance
the two. A broad correlationship was all that was necessary.
Quid pro  quo in  the strict  sense is	not the one and only
true index  of a fee; nor is it necessarily absent in a tax.
A.P. Sen,  J. in  the said  decision observed at page 235 of
the report as follows:-
	  "What do  we learn from these precedents? We learn
     that there is no generic difference between a tax and a
     fee, though  broadly a  tax is a compulsory exaction as
     part of a common burden, without promise of any special
     advantages to  classes of tax payers whereas a fee is a
     payment for  services  rendered,  benefit	provided  or
     privilege conferred.  Compulsion is not the hallmark of
     the distinction between a tax and a fee. That the money
     collected
(1) [1980] I S.C R. 368.
(2) [1980] 3 S.C.R. 104.
(3) 11983] 3 S.C.C. 229.
255
     does not  go into a separate fund but goes into the con
     solidated fund  does not also necessarily make a levy a
     A tax.  Though a fee must have relation to the services
     rendered, or  the advantages  conferred, such  relation
     need not  be direct;  a mere  casual  relation  may  be
     enough. Further,  neither the  incidence of the fee nor
     the service  rendered need	 the  uniform.	That  others
     besides those  paying the	fees are also benefited does
     not detract  from the character of the fee. In fact the
     special benefit  or advantage to the payers of the fees
     n-ay even	be secondary  as compared  with the  primary
     motive of regulation in the public interest. Nor is the
     court to  assume the  role of  a cost accountant. It is
     neither  necessary	  nor	expedient   to	 weigh	 too
     meticulously the  cost of	the services  rendered	etc.
     against the  amount of  fees collected  so as to evenly
     balance the two. A broad correlationship is all that is
     necessary. Quid  pro quo in the strict sense is not the
     one and only true index of a fee, nor it is necessarily
     absent in a tax."
     In the  case of  Southern Pharmaceuticals	&  Chemicals
Trichur &  Ors. Etc.  v. State	of Keral & Ors. Etc.(1) This
view as	 again reiterated  at page  542 of  the report, A.P.
Sen, J. Observed as follows:-
	  "It  is  now	increasingly  realised	that  merely
     because the  collections for  the services	 rendered or
     grant of  a privillege  or licence,  are taken  to	 the
     consolidated fund	of the	State and are not separately
     appropriated towards  the expenditure for rendering the
     service is	 not by itself decisive. That is because the
     Constitution did not contemplate, it to be an essential
     element of	 a fee	that it	 should	 be  credited  to  a
     separate fund  and not  to the consolidated fund. It is
     also increasingly realised that the element of quid pro
     quo stricto  senso is  not always	a sine	quo non of a
     fee. It  is needless to stress that the element of quid
     pro quo is not necessarily absent in every tax."
(1) [1982]1 S.C.R. 519.
256
     The learned  judge at  page 543  of the report observed
that  the   A  traditional  concept  of	 quid  pro  quo	 was
undergoing a transformation.
     It is  not necessary,  however, for the purpose of this
case to	 express any  opinion as  to whether the traditional
concept of quid pro quo is undergoing any transformation and
if so  to what	extent? Even  on the  basis  of	 traditional
concept it  is well-settled  that though  there must be some
special services  to the  payers of the fees, to be a fee it
is not necessary that all the services must be to the payers
of the	fees nor  can the correlation between payment of fee
and  services  rendered	 be  established  with	mathematical
exactitude. It	is permissible	in the modern set up to take
into account  projections  into	 future	 and  not  only	 the
present	 services   can	 be   utilised	for  justifying	 the
imposition of fee. All planning, project into the future for
its existence and survival.
     Any incidental  benefit to	 those other than the payers
of the fee is not decisive of the fact whether it is a 'tax'
or a  'fee'. It	 is necessary to find out the primary object
and essential purpose of the imposition (emphasis supplied).
If  the	  primary  object   and	 essential  purpose  of	 the
imposition be  service of  some special kind to the users of
the market  or payers  of fee,	other consequences  or other
benefits to  others do not in the least affect the position.
The concept of benefit to the users of market must he looked
at from	 a  broad  commonsense	point  of  view,  taking  an
integrated view.  In today's  world you	 cannot build a good
market if  the accesses	 through which	the produce comes to
the market  are not  maintained. However,  at what point the
roads will  begin and at what point the roads will end to be
able to	 justify the  roads necessary to maintain solely the
market, appears to be highly theoretical and unreal question
in the modern concept of integrated development.
     In the case of Sreenivasa General Traders and Others v.
State Of  Andhra Pradesh  and Others(1),  a bench  of  three
judges of  this Court  had to  deal with  this question. The
said decision reiterated the distinction between a fee and a
tax and	 observed that	a tax was levied as part of a common
burden, while a fee was for payment of a specific benefit or
privilege although  the special	 advantage was	secondary to
the primary motive of regulation in public interest
(1) [1983] 4 S.C.C. 353.
257
According to this decision in determining whether a levy was
of fee,	 the true  test must  be  whether  its	primary	 and
essential purpose  was A  to render  specific services	to a
specified area	or class; it might be of no consequence that
the State  might ultimately and directly be benefited by it.
There must,  however, be a reasonable relationship between a
levy of fee and the services rendered to the payers of fees.
According to  this decision,  Kewal Krishan  Puri's case did
not lay	 down any  legal principle of general applicability.
Sreenivasa General  Traders' case  (supra) was	approved  by
another decision of the bench of three learned judges in the
case of	 Amar Nath Om Parkash & Ors. etc. v. State of Punjab
& Ors.(l) (Judgment delivered by O. Chinnappa Reddy, J.).
     Prior to  all this, in the case of State of Maharashtra
& Ors.	v. The	Salvation Army,	 Western India Territory(1),
this Court  had to consider the question of fee under Bombay
Public Trust Act, 1950. The Court noted that fee was defined
as a charge for a special service rendered to individuals by
the Government	or some	 other agency like a local authority
or statutory  corporation. The	amount	of  fee	 levied	 was
supposed to  be based  on expenses incurred in rendering the
services, though  in many  cases the  cost  was	 arbitrarily
assessed. This	Court noted that fees were generally uniform
but absence of uniformity was not a criterion on which alone
it could  be said that levy was in the nature of a tax. As a
fee was	 regarded as  a sort  of return or consideration for
services rendered,  it was  necessary that  levy  should  be
correlated  to	 the  expenses	incurred  in  rendering	 the
services. This	Court in  Salvation Army's  case  reiterated
that in might not however be possible to prove in every case
that the  fees collected always approximated to the expenses
that were  incurred in	rendering  the	particular  kind  of
services or  in	 performing  any  particular  work  for	 the
benefit of  certain individuals.  In that  case,  the  Court
found that  revenue expenditure was about 62 per cent of the
amount of  revenue receipts  from 1953	to 1970 and this was
considered approximate	correlation and	 the Court held that
the levy  was in  the nature  of a fee. The Court dealt with
the question  of G capital expenditure and observed that the
expenditure in	constructing buildings for locating the head
offices and  regional offices and the increase in allowances
or other amenities to the staff had also to be
(1) Civil  Appeal  Nos.	 4500  and  4501  of  1984-(judgment
delivered by 19.1 1.1984).
(2) [1975] S.C.R. 475,
258
included in  the cost  of services.  The Court observed that
when A	there was a surplus it could not immediately be said
that the  surplus must	necessarily go	in reduction  of the
rate of contribution to be levied thereafter. This Court was
of the view that it was neither expedient nor prudent to lay
down  any  abstract  proposition  that	whenever  there	 was
surplus in  a particular  year or  years that  surplus	must
always	be   taken  into   consideration  and  the  rate  of
contribution  should   be  reduced  for	 the  next  year  or
subsequent years.  An organisation  like the  Salvation Army
had to	incur capital  expenditure for the better allowances
or other  amenities  to	 the  staff  and  these	 had  to  be
included. tn after taking into account the capital and other
expenditure  necessary	 for  efficient	 functioning  of  an
organisation for  the better  administration of Trust a very
large surplus  was still left then, the Court noted that the
question would arise whether then it was permissible for the
organisation to	 continue the  levy at	the rate which would
only result  in further	 surplus and  to invest	 the surplus
solely for earning income or to divert the surplus for other
objects. The  Court noted that it was not necessary that all
available surplus  should always  go in reducing the rate of
contribution for  subsequent years,  the organisation  could
not be	allowed to  accumulate	unreasonable  amounts  i.e.,
amounts which  might not  reasonably be	 required for proper
and efficient  working of  the organisation.  In drawing the
line, however,	the Court would have to look into the nature
of the	organisation, the  potentiality of  its growth,	 the
multiplication in  its work  consequent or its expansion for
rendering to  services	visualised  and	 the  necessity	 for
capital expenditure  in near  future and  also the amount of
levy collected	or expected  to	 be  collected.	 It  may  be
mentioned that	in  the	 case  of  Indian  Mica	 &  Micanite
Industries Ltd.	 v. State  of Bihar  & Ors.(1)	whether in a
particular  case   there  was  a    correlation	 or  not  is
essentially a question of fact.
     As has been noted estimates had been filed on behalf of
the various  market committees	before the High Court. These
estimates  were	  criticised  on   behalf  of	petitioners-
appellants  as	 being	totally	  at   variance	  with	 the
corresponding estimates	 furnished for	the same  period and
furnished   for	  1974-75.   The   present   estimates	 and
projections, it	 was submitted	on behalf of the appellants,
were prepared  only with a view to supply an artificial quid
pro quo for the enhanced levy and were merely show-pieces on
paper to get over the
(3) [1971] Supp. S.C.R. 319.
259
present challenge.  It was  further  contended	that  having
regard to the pace of growth and performance levels over the
past seven  years A  out of the fifteen years period, it was
unreasonable  to   expect  that	  the	huge   developmental
activities now	projected for  the  next  eight	 years	were
really intended to be acted upon.
     Secondly, it  was submitted  that the  disparities	 and
variance in  the proportion of the proposed development from
market-yard to market-yard were so glaring that no authority
in  the	 position  of  the  Chief  Marketing  Officer  could
reasonably approve  of	such  uncoordinated  and  disjointed
development of the regulated markets.
     Thirdly, it was urged that many items of work envisaged
in the	development schemes  such as  construction of shops,
godowns and  the like  were  unrelated	to  the	 concept  of
special service	 to the	 buyers and could not be reckoned as
qualified for  correlation, and	 that if these impermissible
items were deleted from the estimates, the market committees
would not  be in a position to establish the requisite quid-
pro-quo.
     Fourthly, it  was said  that a  substantial part of the
proposed financial  outlays related  to development  of what
were  called   "Rural  Markets"	  and  these   outlays	were
ineligible to be reckoned as special service to the buyers.
     The  High	 Court	in   its  judgment   analysed  these
submissions and	 contentions carefully with reference to the
financial statements  and projections  filed by	 the market-
committees  and	  these	  statements   were   discussed	  at
considerable length by the High Court.
     In the  context of the said contentions urged on behalf
of the	appellants, the	 High Court  had examined  the	said
statements and projections and recorded findings on these in
its  judgement.	 The  High  Court  had	also  given  certain
directions. It was, therefore, submitted that the market fee
on the	buyers of  the agricultural  produce was  originally
levied at  3 )	p. which was increased to I per cent and was
further increased from l per cent to 2 per cent and the said
enhancement of	market	fees  was  thus	 challenged  by	 the
appellants on  the ground  of non-existence  of quid pro quo
and the	 respondents-market committee  attempted to  justify
the enhanced  levy of  2  per  cent  on	 the  basis  of	 the
statements and projections
260
mentioned hereinbefore.	 The High Court noted that that were
certain	 inaccuracies	and  lack   of	particulars  in	 the
projections but	 the  High  Court  ultimately  came  to	 the
conclusion that	 on the	 materials placed  before it  on the
basis of  the principles  of la	 v as  discussed by the High
Court, it  could not be said that there was no quid-pro quo.
On the	other  hand  it	 was  contended	 on  behalf  of	 the
appellants that there was a total failure on the part of the
respondents to	discharge  the	burden	for  sustaining	 the
enhanced levy  of market  fee, it  was urged  that the	High
Court consequent to its findings referred to above, ought to
have quashed  the  bye-laws  of	 the  market  committees  in
respect	 of   categories  C,   and  mentioned  hereinbefore.
According to  the appellants,  the enhanced  market fee from
30th June, 1979 could not be supported.
     The contention of learned counsel for the appellant was
that tho  findings of the High Court with reference to eight
committees in category 'E' were untenable. On the other hand
on behalf  of the  respondents it  was submitted that out of
the 93 market committees, in respect of 73 market committees
falling under categories A, B, C D, a clear quid pro quo was
established  and  no  further  enquiry	was  needed  on	 the
principles laid down by this Court.
     Having examined  the nature of the transactions and the
principles of  law applicable  to this	case as I have noted
before, I am of the opinion that the High Court was right in
its conclusion.
     The proper	 principles discernible from these decisions
are; (1)  there should	be relationship	 between service and
fee, (2)  that the  relationship  is  reasonable  cannot  be
established with  mathematical exactitude  in the sense that
both sides  must be  equally balanced,	(3) in the course of
rendering such	services to  the payers	 of the	 fee if some
other benefits	accrue or  arise to  others, quid-pro-quo is
not destroyed.	The concept of quid-pro-quo should be judged
in the	context of  the present	 days-a concept	 of  markets
which are  expected to	render various	services and provide
various amenities and these benefits cannot be divorced from
the  benefits	accruing  incidentally	 to  others,  (4)  a
reasonable projection  for the	future years  of a practical
scheme is  permissible and  (5) services rendered must be to
the users  of those  markets or	 to the	 subsequent users of
those markets as a class. Though fee is not levied as a part
of common  burden yet  service and payment cannot exactly be
balanced. (6) The primary
261
Object and  the essential  purpose of the imposition must be
looked into.
     Having  regard   to  the	detailed  analysis   of	 the
expenditure of	the various market committees, we agree with
the conclusion	of the	High Court that it could not be said
that  the  expenditure	and  appropriation  of	fee  was  so
disproportionate to  the projects  actual and projected that
it could be said that the levy lost the character of fee. An
analysis of  the High  Court's judgment	 would indicate that
out of	93 market  committees about which the High Court was
concerned, in  respect of 73 market committees falling under
categories A,  B, &  D, a clear quid-pro-quo was established
on a reasonable view. In respect of the 20 market committees
falling in  category of,  the High  Court  found  that	with
regard to  the 8  committees only, final projections for the
purpose of  correlating the  fees charged  and the  services
rendered  required   individual	 consideration.	 These	were
Bangalore, Hubli. Sagar, Bijapur, Raichur, Tiptur, Gadag and
Siddapur.  The	 High  Court   found  that   the   projected
expenditure was	 relatable to and referrable to the services
rendered and  to be rendered to the payers of the fee. While
the High  Court observed that the levy of fee was justified,
the High  Court laid  down certain  guidelines and norms for
the market committees for the future.
     The High Court examined in detail the estimates of each
of the	market committees.  The High Court felt that even if
some of	 the items  of expenditure  which were	specifically
challenged and	which the High Court noted were not strictly
permissible, on	 the basis  of the remaining works there was
ground	to   hold  that	  there	 was  requisite	 measure  of
correlation  between  fees  collected  and  intended  to  be
collected and  services rendered and intended to be rendered
but the High Court felt that for proper working of statutory
bodies like  the market committees, general directions about
the future expenditure should be given.
     As we have mentioned hereinbefore, at the invitation of
Advocate-General and  the counsel for the market committees,
the High  Court gave certain directions. It is not necessary
in disposing  of these	appeals to  deal in  detail with the
specific directions  given. The	 High Court was competent to
give these  directions. We  accept the	submissions urged on
behalf of  the respondents that these directions were within
the competence of the High Court while
262
dealing with  the grievances  made under  Article 226 of the
Constitution   to    ensure   that   appropriate   statutory
authorities  acted   according	 to   law   after   properly
ascertaining the facts and for the purpose of rendering full
justice to  the parties.  (See for  the nature of directions
the High Court is capable of giving under Article 226 of the
Constitution Bandhua Mukti Morcha v. Union of India & Ors(l)
See also  the decision	in the	case of	 State of  Kerala v.
Kumari T.P.  Roshana &	Anr.(3) In the case of Kewal Krishan
Puri &	Anr. v. State of Punjab & Others, (supra) this Court
had given  certain   directions for  future guidance  of the
authorities.
     For  the  purpose	of  how	 the  Court  can  mould	 its
directions  in	 order	to   give  relief  in  a  particular
situation, we may refer to the nature of directions given by
the   American	 Supreme   Court,   in	 abolishing   racial
discrimination and  the judicial efforts made with attending
difficulties,  and   how  the	Supreme	 Court	 of  America
formulated by  trial and  error the  process of	 making	 the
relief	effective   to	the   discussions  in  Corwin's	 The
Constitution and  what it  means today'	 14th Edn pages 504-
511].
     Therefore, the High Court, while finding that there was
a correlation  between the  services rendered  and the	fees
charged with regard to the eight market committees, directed
the Chief  Marketing Officer  to make  certain enquiries  on
certain principles  of correlation and directed the surplus,
if found,  on such  enquiry, to be appropriately adjusted in
the' future by way of reductions of fees.
     Pursuant to  the above  directions in  respect of eight
Marketing committees,  the Chief Marketing Officer went into
the facts.  After the  Marketing  Committees  had  submitted
their budgets  and the projections, these have been approved
by the	Chief Marketing	 Officer. After	 such approval,	 the
concerned  Marketing   Committees  have	 passed	 appropriate
resolution for	giving effect to the norms laid down and the
projects approved.  This has  been stated  in the  affidavit
filed by  the Chief  Marketing Officer	in reply  to special
leave petition.	 (See  the  affidavit  filed  by  the  Chief
Marketing  Officer   in	 the   Belgana	Marketing  Committee
petition). This, in our opinion is a constructive approach.
(1) [1984]3 S.C.C. 161 at 240-242.
(2) [1965] 2 S.C.R. 974.
263
	 Courts of today cannot and do not any longer remain
passive with  the negative  attitude, merely striking down a
law or	preventing A  something being  done. 'Thou shall not
do't' used  to be  the previous form of remedy encouraged by
Courts. But the new attitude is towards positive affirmative
actions, directions  people or	authorities  concerned	that
'thou shall do't' in this manner. While it is true that if a
law is bad, the Court must strike it down, if the law by and
large and  in its  true perspective  of a  social purpose if
implemented in a particular manner could be valid, then. the
Court can  and should  ensure that implementations should be
done in	 such particular  manner and give directions to that
effect. In the instant case the High Court having found with
which finding  we  are	in  agreement,	that  basically	 and
essentially the	 fee was justified on the theory of quid pro
quo, the  Court was  entitled to give positive directions in
the manner the money should be spent.
     Another argument  on this	aspect was  that estimate of
Tiptur Market  Committee showed that there was a surplus Rs.
72 lakhs  in the  year ending 1982. It was contended that so
long as	 this  surplus	remained,  there  was  no  case	 for
increasing market  fee from  I percent	to 2 percent. It was
also submitted	that according	to the projections filed and
the estimated  expenditure for the future upto 1988-89 there
would be a surplus of about Rs. 3 crores at the end of 1988-
89. But	 reading the  projections properly  it appears	that
though estimated  earning would be Rs. 3.26 crore at the end
of 1988-89;  at	 the  same  time  the  estimate	 showed	 the
projected expenditure  from 1981-82  to 1988-89 would amount
to Rs. 4.28 crores. These projections are not imaginary, and
if the	Market committee,  in the present trend of inflation
and  the   need	 for  modern  markets,	had  taken  these  F
projections into consideration, the same cannot be condemned
as unreasonable.  Thus looked  at, it appears that the extra
expenditure of	estimates showed  a projected  loan for	 the
deficit.
     In the  aforesaid view of the matter, we are of opinion
that the  High Court  was right in holding (a) that the quid
pro quo	 necessary to  be established in these types of fees
has been  established, (b)  that the  projections have	been
properly taken	into consideration  and they  are reasonable
projections, (c) the directions given by the High Court were
within the  competence of the High Court to meet the ends of
justice.
264
     In the  premises the  first question  reserved for	 our
consideration A	 must be  answered by  saying that  the High
Court is  right in  holding that the increase was justified.
Necessarily point No. 3 must also be answered by saying that
the High  Court had  come, in the facts and circumstances of
the case, to a definite conclusion of this aspect in respect
of eight  market committees mentioned hereinbefore. The High
Court had  not abandoned,  for the  reasons mentioned herein
before,	 its  jurisdiction  in	not  coming  to	 a  definite
conclusion about  the requisite	 correlation to	 sustain the
quid-pro-quo for the imposition of the market fee. I am also
of the	opinion that  the High	Court was  competent for the
reasons indicated  hereinbefore to  give directions  to	 the
market committees  in the manner it had done.  Point Nos. l,
3, 4 & 5 mentioned hereinbefore are therefore disposed of in
favour of  the respondents  in the  manner indicated  herein
before.
     So far  as to  the question  of refund of the amount of
the market  fees to  any of  the party is concerned. 11 will
briefly have  to  note	the  position  arising	out  of	 the
judgment of the High Court.
     It was  contended on  behalf  of  the  appellants	that
section 65(1)  as substituted  by Act  17 of 1980, read with
section 42  of the  Amending Act,  seeking to  validate	 the
collection of  market fee  on "sellers"	 made under  the old
section 65  (1) of  the Act is constitutionally invalid. The
validation became  necessary as	 mentioned  hereinbefore  in
view of	 the judgment  of the,	Karnataka High	Court in the
case  of  Rajasekhariah	 (supra).  The	present	 substituted
section 65(1) read with section 42 of the Amending Act seeks
to validate  the collection  of market	fee on	sellers made
when the  earlier section  65(1) was  operative. We have set
out the	 relevant  provisions  and  the	 background  of	 the
challenge to the Act.
     The High  Court of	 Karnataka in  its impugned judgment
had set	 out exhaustively  the grounds	upon which  the said
High Court  has (previously  in Rajasekhariah's	 case struck
down section 65 (1) (3) of the Act. Pursuant to the judgment
in Rajasekhariah's  case,  the	State  was  exposed  to	 the
liability to  refund the  fee collected	 for the period from
19.5.1975 when	section 65(]) and (3) were introduced by the
Amending Act 21 of 1975 and 28.9.1978 when that judgment was
pronounced. By	the said Act of 1980, the levy was sought to
be validated  and the  fee retained by the State Government.
The High  Court noticed	 the relevant substitution First, by
virtue of
265
sub-section 1(2)  of section  19 of  the amending  Act,	 the
amendment had  been  deemed  to	 have  come  into  force  on
19.5.1975-  in	 other	A  words  making  it  retrospective.
Secondly by  clause (ii)  of subsection	 63 and item (ii) of
clause (a)  of sub-section (2) of section 63 as amended, the
expression  "Marketing"	  was  substituted   by	 the   words
"transport and marketing". In clause (ii) of sub-section (2)
of section  63, item  (ia) was	newly introduced  making the
provision for, either independently or along with some other
authority,  necessary	facilities  for	  the  transport  of
notified agricultural  produce from  and to the yard, as one
of the obligatory functions of the market committees.
     Thirdly, section  20 of  the Amending Act brought about
certain changes	 in the structure of section 65 while making
such amendment	retrospective with  effect  from  19.5.1975-
being the date on which it was originally introduced.
     The High  Court has  set out section 42 of the Amending
Act which validated the levy of market fee etc. It was urged
before the  High Court	that the market recollected from the
sellers	 between  19.9.1975  and  28.9.1978  under  the	 old
section 65(1)  had gone	 to the	 credit of and merged in the
"Karnataka Roads  and Bridges  Fund" constituted  under	 the
Karnataka Motor	 Vehicles Taxation  Act and  the market fees
have obviously	been spent  for the  purposes and objects of
"Karnataka Roads  and Bridges Fund", and by deleting section
65(3)-even if  it be  with retrospective effect - the events
that have  factually happened pursuant to section 65(3) when
it was	operative, could  not be reversed. The effect Or the
amendment was  not, it was submitted, before the High Court,
to put	the funds  back into  the coffers  of the respective
market committees  enabling them  to spend  them for such of
the  purposes	authorised  by	 the  Act  as  would  afford
correlation by	way of	service to  the fee.  It was further
contended that	all that,  at best.  the amendments could be
said to	 have achieved	was that  providing "facilities	 for
transport" which  was not one of the duties and functions of
the market  committees earlier	had now	 been made as one of
their duties  and functions.  It was  urged that even if the
"facilities  for   transport"  could   be  said	 to  include
construction of	 rural	roads,	only  the  first  defect  or
infirmity pointed  out in  Rajasekharih's case could be said
to have	 been cured  or removed	 but not  the more important
one, the second.
     Learned Advocate-General contended that the only ground
on which  the previous	judgment invalidated the levy on the
sellers was
266
that the market committees were not statutorily charged with
the A  duty of constructing and maintaining rural roads, and
now that,  the duty  of providing,  either independently  or
along with  any other  authority, necessary  facilities	 for
transport, which  included the making of roads in the market
area leading to and from the marketyards, the defect noticed
in the law has been removed and the legal basis for the levy
supplied.  Learned  Advocate-General  submitted	 that  as  a
result of  Rajasekhariah's case	 the State  was exposed to a
liability to  refund several crores of rupees which had been
realised by  way of  sellers fee  under section	 65(1),	 and
which according	 to  him,  had,	 in  fact,  been  spent	 for
providing  facilities	for  transport	 in  the   form	  of
construction, improvement  and	repair	and  maintenance  of
rural roads.
     The High  Court noticed the relevant provisions and the
principles of  law which  should govern	 the  power  of	 the
legislature to	cure any  defect in  law with  retrospective
effect and  to validate	 acts done  or taken under defective
law which were declared invalid by the courts on any around.
     It is  well-settled that  if such	validating law cures
the constitutional  vice from  which the earlier legislation
suffered, the  validation must	be given  effect  to.  These
principles are	well-settled by	 the decisions of this Court
in the	cases of  Misrilal Jain etc. etc. v. State of Orissa
and Another(l),	 Shri Prithvi  Cotton Mills  Ltd. &  Anr. v.
Broach	Borough	  Municipality	&   Ors.  (   '),  Municipal
Corporation of	the City  of Ahmedabad,	 Etc. v. New Shorock
Spg. &	Wvg. Co. Ltd., Etc (B) and l.N. Saksena v. The State
of Madhya  Pradesh.(4) The  tests are well settled and it is
not  necessary	 to  reiterate	those.	The  validity  of  a
validating law	has to	be judged mainly by judging, firstly
whether a  legislature possesses competence over the subject
matter i.e., whether by validation, the legislature exercise
competence over	 the subject  matter and secondly whether by
validation the	legislature has removed the defect which the
court had  found in  the previous law and thirdly whether it
is consistent  with  the  provisions  of  Part	III  of	 the
Constitution.
(1) A.I.R. 1977 S.C. 1686=[1977] 3 S.C.R. 714.
(2) A.l.R. 1970 S.C. 192=[1970] 1 S.C.R. 388.
(3) A.I.R. 1970 S.C. 1292=[1971]1 S.C.R. 288.
(4) A.l.R. 1976 S.C. 2250=[1976} 3 S.C.R. 237.
267
     The High  Court was  of the  view that  facilities	 for
rural roads  could not	be a  ground for collection of fees.
The High  Court was  A further	of the	view that  this	 was
concluded by  the decision  of this  Court in  Kewal Krishan
Puri's case (supra).
     l have  set  out  hereinbefore  the  principles  to  be
governed  in   case  of	  judging  the	correlation  between
'service'  and	'fee'  and  the	 changing  pattern  of	this
concept. Construction  of rural	 roads giving facilities for
going to  the market  is a  special  service  primarily	 and
(directly intended  for tile benefit of the users of market.
Market could  not be  reached and  people cannot go and come
from the  market if  there are	no good rural roads to reach
those markets.	This view  has been  recently reiterated  by
this Court  after discussing several authorities in the case
of M/s Amar Nath Om Parkash & Ors. Etc. v. The State  Punjab
& Ors.	Etc. (supra)  where it	was  held  that	 it  was  of
fundamental importance	that there  should be  a network  of
roadways if  effective aid  was to  be given  to farmers  to
transport and  market  their  produce.	In  this  connection
reliance may  be placed	 also on  the observations  of	this
Court in  the case  of Municipal Corporation Delhi v. MOJId.
Yasin (supra)  where it	 was reiterated	 that the  fact that
others besides those paying the fees are o benefited did not
detract from  the characted  of the  fee. The Court observed
that in	 fact the special benefit or advantage to the payers
of the	fees might  even be  secondary as  compared with the
primary motive	of regulation  in the public interest. Quid-
pro-quo in  strict sense  is not the one and only true index
of a fee as we have mentioned hereinbefore.
     Judged by	this concept,  in my opinion, the High Court
was in	error in  view of  the principles  we have discussed
about the  concept of  fee and	therefore  rural  roads	 for
construction, improvement  and maintenance  of which sellers
fees have  been applied could be said to be an obligation of
the market  committee. Now  that has  been made function and
obligation of  the market  committees by  the amendment with
retrospective effect  which  we	 have  noticed	before.	 The
learned Advocate-General  had stated  before the  High Court
that the  funds from  the "Karnataka  Roads &  Bridges Fund"
collected from	these fees  have in  fact been spent for the
rural roads, the facilities for which are for the benefit of
the users  of the markets. In the facts and circumstances it
should be  presumed and	 assumed that the funds spent by the
"Karnataka Roads  & Bridges  Fund" under  the Motor Vehicles
Act have in fact been spent as an agency of the market
268
committees in  discharge of the functions and obligations of
these A committees. In view of the amended provisions of the
statute which  we have	mentioned providing  facilities	 for
transport  is	one  of	  the  obligations   of	 the  market
committees. In	my opinion,  realisation of  fees  for	such
facilities would  be justified	and valid.  If, as  we	have
discussed, without rural roads, markets could not be reached
and the	 functions for	which  the  market  committees	were
constituted could  not be performed, if it is of fundamental
importance that	 there should  be a  network of	 roadways if
effective aid  is to be given to buyers and sellers of goods
for marketing  their products,	then in my opinion, the fact
that the  public streets and roads are public properties and
the State  holds such streets and roads as trustees would be
of no consequences in considering such realisation as fees.
     The contribution  to the  "Karnataka Roads	 and Bridges
Fund" maintainable under Motor Vehicles Act having been made
as an  agency of  the market committees for the construction
of these  roads which  facilitated the purpose of the market
committees as  amended by the Amending Act. I am, therefore,
of the	opinion that  the High Court was in error in holding
that the  second major defect noticed in the law authorising
the levy  on the  sellers in  Rajasekhariah's  case  (supra)
namely construction  of rural  roads would not qualify being
reckoned as a special service to the class of persons paying
the fee,  had not  been cured  or removed  by the  law which
sought to  validate  the  levy.	 The  Act  which  sought  to
validate the  levy contributed	to the	"Karnataka Roads and
Bridges Fund"  was for the maintenance of rural roads which,
as I  have noticed, forms an integral part of the facilities
for marketing of the goods. I am therefore unable to sustain
the findings  of the  High Court  of Karnataka	that section
65(1) as  substituted as Section 20 of the Act 17 of 1980 as
well  as   section  42	 of  the   Attending  Act   was	 not
constitutional valid  and was  liable to  be struck  down. I
hold that  these are  constitutionally valid  in view of the
perspective in	which the concept of fee has to be judged in
the light  of the  decision I have referred to hereinbefore.
If that	 is the	 position then	no question  of refund would
really arise,  in view	of the provisions of the said Act as
amended by  Act 17  of 1980  and section 42 of the Act 17 of
1980 as	 it validated  the market  fee	on  sellers  between
19.5.1975 and  28.9.1978. The  funds collected	had remained
with the  Government and  have been spent for purposes which
are valid  purposes in view of the amendment. So no question
of refund arises.
269
     In any  event I am of the opinion that there should not
be any	refund in  the facts  and circumstances of the case,
Section 42  of the  A Amending Act has specifically provided
against refund	of levy	 of fees  already  collected,  I  am
therefore of the opinion that such a provision was valid. At
no stage  was it claimed or stated that the traders had paid
market fees themselves. The appellants before this Court are
buyers in  the Market but they themselves are trading in the
commodities purchased  by  them.  On  further  sale  of	 the
commodities as	traders they  have recovered  the fees	from
their purchasers. For this purpose reliance may be placed on
the observations  of this  Court in the decision in the case
of D.  Cawasji &  Co. Etc.  Etc. v.  The State	of Mysore  &
Anr.(1) Most  of these	have been  discussed in	 the  recent
decision of this Court in the case of Amar Nath Om Parkash &
Ors. (supra)  and in  that view of the matter and in view of
section 42  of the  Amending  Act  which  provided  for	 the
validation of  the levy	 of market  fee and  which  provided
further by  section 42(1)(b)  & (c)  that no proceedings for
refund would lie, in my opinion, in so far as the High Court
had directed  to refund in certain cases as indicated in the
judgment of the High Courts I am unable to sustain that part
of the order and that order is set aside. I may mention that
when there  was no provision like section 42 of the Amending
Act and	 there was  a liability of refund n the case of Shiv
Shenkar Dal  Mills Etc..  Etc v.  State	 of  Haryana  &	 Ors
Etc.(x),  this	Court  had  evolved  certain  procedure	 for
utilisation of	the funds  collected so	 as to	avoid  undue
enrichment. In	view of	 the principles	 discussed above and
the cases  noted in  the aforesaid  decision in Amar Nath Om
Parkash &  Ors. case  (supra), we  are of  the opinion	that
section 42 of the Amending Act is valid and by virtue of the
said section,  that cannot  be any  order for  refund in the
instant case.  It must	be borne in mind that the High Court
has given specific directions for utilisation of the surplus
fund in	 certain matters to the market committees. Point (2)
noted above is thus disposed of.
     The next  question that arises is whether the amendment
of the	bye-laws enhancing  the market	fee was	 invalid for
want of	 compliance with  the mandate  of section 148 of the
Act requiring  previous publication and previous sanction of
the Chief Marketing Officer. The High Court had exhaustively
discussed this matter and I have
(1) [19751 2 S.C.R. 511.
(2) 11980]1 S.C.R. 1170.
270
referred to  this discussion  before and  had  come  to	 the
conclusion A that section 65(2) did not confer any arbitrary
power and  there was  no excessive delegation of legislative
power to the market committees and therefore not vitiated on
that account.  The question whether on a proper construction
of section 65(2) there was any obligation on the part of the
marketing committee  to hear  the parties was left open with
certain observations  and directions  contained in paragraph
61 of  the judgment  of the  High Court.  I am in respectful
agreement with that direction of the High Scud.
     So far  as the  High Court held against the contentions
of the	appellants that	 bye-laws were	invalid for  want of
previous publication or for want of consulting the interests
affected, I  am also in respectful agreement for the reasons
discussed by  the High Court which need not to be reiterated
again, with  that view. The principle of audi alteram partem
has  application   only	 to   judicial,	 quasijudicial	 and
administrative	functions   and	 not   to  any	 legislative
functions   See The  Tulsipur Sugar Co. Ltd. v. The Notified
Area Committee,Tulsipur.('), S.A. de Smith ' Judicial Review
of Administrative  Action ',  4th P.dn. pages 181 to 183. In
any event the rule of 'audi alteram partem' is applicable in
exercise of  the States' power of taxation-See Avinder Singh
Etc. v.	 State of  Punjab &  Anr. Etc  (2) This	 disposes of
point no. (7).
     The next  contention canvassed before us was whether in
view of the Tobacco Board Act, 1975, hereinafter referred to
as the	Central Act  and the issue of the notification dated
31st August, 1984 by which section 13 of the Central Act was
made applicable	 in the State of Karnataka, in so far as the
Central Act  dealt with	 the marketing of tobacco, the State
legislature was not competent to pass this enactment. It was
submitted that	tobacco was covered by entry 52 of List I by
virtue of  the declaration  under section  2 of	 the Central
Act. It	 was submitted	that the High Court has erred by not
acting in  the parity  of reasoning  adopted in	 respect  of
Cardamom Act.  As I  have noticed  that in  case of Cardamom
Act, 1965, the High Court was of the opinion in the impugned
judgment that  the said Act was not within the competence of
the State Legislature. Yet neither the market committees nor
the State  Government had preferred any appeal in respect of
that finding. It was sought to be
(1) [1980] 2 S.C.R. 1111 at pages 1118 to 1121.
(2) [1979]1 S.C.R. 845.
271
impressed before  this Court  that the same reasoning should
apply in view of the similarity of provisions of the Central
Act as	with A	Cardamom Act  as it  should have  been	held
logically by  the High	Court that the State Legislature was
not competent  to extend  marketing provisions to tobacco in
the State Act. Tobacco was brought within the network of the
Act by virtue of Karnataka Act 17 of 1980.
     Two  broad	 principles  should  be	 borne	in  mind  in
deciding the  controversy of  this nature.  One is whether a
particular legislation or enactment is within the competence
of particular  legislature must	 be judged after finding out
the pith  and substance,  in other words the true nature and
character, of  the legislation	in question and secondly the
entries in  the list  should be	 given liberal	and generous
construction.  All   the  entries  should  be  construed  in
harmonious manner  so as  to  avoid  conflict.	In  case  of
conflict, however,  in respect	of entries  where  both	 the
State and  the Centre can legislate, the Central legislation
would prevail  over the	 State Legislation  in view  of	 the
provisions of  Articles 245  to 254  of the Constitution. It
was submitted  that the	 effect	 of  the  declaration  under
section 2  of the Central Act pursuant to Entry 52 of List I
is that the Parliament has exclusive competence to legislate
upon  every  aspect  or	 activity  pertaining  to  'tobacco'
including marketing  thereof and  the State  would  have  no
competence  to	 legislate  on	 that  topic.  As  mentioned
hereinbefore a declaration under Entry 52 of List I of-Vllth
Schedule has  been made	 in respect. Of tobacco. Entry 52 of
the said  list provides 'Industries, the control of which by
the Union  is declared	by Parliament by law to be expedient
in the public interest.'
     It	 is   well-settled  that   the	cardinal   rule	  of
interpretation is  that the  words should  be read  in their
ordinary natural  and grammatical  meaning. But	 words in  a
constitutional document conferring legislative powers should
also  be  construed  most  liberally  and  in  their  widest
amplitude. See	Navinchandra Mafatlal v. C. 1. T. Bombay(l).
On behalf  of the  appellants reliance	was  placed  on	 the
observations in	 the case of Baijnath v. Bihar State(2) that
once a	declaration was	 made, any  legislation by the State
after such declaration trenching upon the field disclosed in
the declaration must necessarily be unconstitutional because
that field  is abstracted from the legislative competence of
the State Legislature. See Kannan
(1) [1955]1 S.C.R. 829 at page;836-37.
(2) [1970] 2 S.C.R. 100 at 113.
272
Devan Hills  Co. v.  Kerala(1) and  Ganga Sugar	 Co. Ltd. v.
State of   U.P..(2)  where dealing  with the sugar industry,
this Court  observed  that  it	was  undisputed	 that  sugar
industry was  a controlled  industry, within  the meaning of
entry  52,  List  I  of	 7th  Schedule	and  therefore,	 the
legislative power  of  Parliament  covered  enactments	with
respect to industries having regard to Article 246(1) of the
Constitution. If  the impugned	legislation invaded Entry 52
it must be repulsed by the Court.
     It was urged that in the instant case declaration under
section 2  of the  Central Act was in respect of the tobacco
industry and  not any  particular type of tobacco as held by
the High Court that it was only virginia tobacco. Therefore,
there was  no warrant  for restricting or limiting the width
and amplitude  of the words "tobacco industry" and confining
it to a particular type or kind of tobacco.
     So fast  as it  was submitted  that the Central Act was
not concerned  with virginia  tobacco only but covered other
tobaccos the High Court was in error. On the construction of
the Central  Act read  with the	 rules it appears to us that
the said  Central Act  and the declaration made by section 2
of the said Act covers all kinds of tobaccos.
     It	 is   well-settled  principle	that   Article	 246
recognised the	principle of  Parliamentary supremacy in the
field of  legislation in  case where  both legislatures have
competence   to	   legislate   (emphasis    supplied).	 The
constitutional	scheme	is  that  Parliament  has  full	 and
exclusive power to legislate with respect to matters in List
I and has also power to legislate with respect to matters in
List  III.  A  State  Legislature  has	exclusive  power  to
legislate with	respect to matters in List II, excluding the
matters	 falling  in  List  I  or  List	 III  and  has	also
concurrent  power  to  legislate  with	respect	 to  matters
falling in List III excluding matters falling in List I. The
dominant position  of the Central Legislature with regard to
matters in  List I  and List III is established. See in this
connection the	decision in  Subrohmanyam v.  Muthuswamy.(3)
Justice Suliaman  in that  case observed  that the rigour of
that literal interpretation of section 100 of the Government
(1) [1973]1 S.C.R. 356 at 369.
(2) 11980] I S.C.R. 769 at 781.
(3) [1940] 45 C.W.N. (FC) I=A.I.R. 194] FC 47 at 57-58.
273
Of India Act, 1935 with which Federal Court was concerned in
that decision  was relaxed  by the  use of  the words  "with
respect to  which A  only signify pith and substance" and do
not forbid  a mere incidental encroachment. This is also the
position  that	 emerges  from	 Article   246(1)   of	 the
Constitution.
     It was  submitted on  behalf of the appellants that the
power of  the State  Legislature with  respect to matters in
List II	 was made  subject to  the power  of  Parliament  to
legislate with	respect to  matters in	List I and therefore
followed that if any entry in List I and List II appeared to
overlap, if  these appeared  partly to cover the same field,
the field of legislation covered by the entry in List I must
be considered  to be  taken out of the scope of the entry in
List Il and C reserved to be only dealt with the Parliament.
In other  words, to  that extent  the  power  of  the  State
Legislature must be considered to be curtailed and the field
must be held to have been occupied by the Centre.
     In the present case the Central Act, it was urged, fell
within entry  52 of  List I.  To the  extent that  Karnataka
State Act,  by amending	 the Schedule brought tobacco within
the provisions	of the	State Act,  it was urged that it was
beyond the  competence of  the State  Legislature and it had
encroached upon the Union List.
     It was,  further, submitted  that in any event that the
competence of  the Parliament  to legislate  in respect of a
matter which  is exclusively  entrusted to it must supersede
pro-tanto the  exercise of  power of  the State Legislature.
Reliance was  placed on	 Sudhir Chand v. Wealth Tax Officer,
Calcutta(1). But  in resolving the rights of component units
of federal  or quasi-federal  set  up  (to  which  category,
however,   Indian    Constitutional   set    up	  belongs-no
Constitutional pundit  has yet	been able  to  say)  earnest
endeavour should  be made  to avoid  a conflict	 between two
competing enteries,  as to  too	 liberal  an  interpretation
given to both of them might create a clash. Therefore it was
urged that the competence of the Karnataka State Legislature
will regard  to marketing  of tobacco and levy of market fee
thereon under  entry 28	 read with entry 66 of List lI which
is "markets  and fairs"	 stood pro-tanto  superseded by	 the
exercise of the Parliamentary power under entry 52 read with
entry 96 of List I.
(1) [1969] S.C.R. 108 at 113,
274
     It was  urged that	 in the	 case of  Cit. Tika  Ramji &
Others Etc.  A v.  The State  of Uttar	Pradesh & Others(l),
this Court  rejected  the  contentions	that  all  sugarcane
legislation linked  to sugar industry was sugar legislation.
Furthermore, on the facts of the case, the Court came to the
conclusion that	 the impugned  Act did not concern itself at
all with  the controlling  or licensing of sugar industry or
with the  production or	 manufacture of	 sugar or with trade
and commerce  in sugar and therefore, there was no trenching
upon the  Union List by the impugned State Act. Reliance was
placed on  the observations  at pages  422-23  of  the	said
decision, mentioned  hereinbefore. Reliance  was also placed
at pages  783-84 in the case of Ganga Sugar Co. Ltd v. State
of U.P. (supra)
     It was  submitted on  behalf of the appellants that the
State Legislature  lost its competence because the field was
occupied by  Parliament in  view of  the  declaration  under
section 2  of the Central Act. It was evident, it was urged,
that the  intention  to	 cover	the  whole  field  has	been
expressed by  the Central  Act and  as intended, the Central
Act is	complete and  exhaustive Code in respect of tobacco.
Consequently,  the   enactment	of   the  subsequent   State
Legislation was	 overborne  on	the  ground  of	 repugnancy.
Reliance was  placed on the decision in the case of State of
Orissa v. M.A. Tulloch & Co.(2).
     The following  submissions were placed before us on the
around of repugnancy:
     (1)  There may  be inconsistency in the actual terms of
	  the  competing   statutes.  (See   R.V.  Brishbane
	  Licensing Court, [19201 28 C.L.R. 23.
     (2)  There may  be no direct conflict and the State law
	  may be inoperative because the Commonwealth law or
	  the award  of the  Commonwealth Court was intended
	  to  be   a   complete	  exhaustive   code   (Clyde
	  Engineering Co.  Ltd. v.  Cowburn [1926] 37 C.L.R.
	  466).
     (3)  Even in  the absence	of intention, a conflict may
	  arise when  both  State  Legislature-	 and  Common
	  wealth
(1) [1956] S.C.R. 393.
(2) [1964] 4 S.C.R. 461 at 477.
275
	  seek to  exercise their powers on the same subject
	  Victoria v.  Commonwealth, [1937]  58 C.L.R.	618;
	  Wenn Attorney General (Vict.) [1948] 77 C.L.R. 84)
	  Nicholas, Australian	Constitution 2nd  Edn at  p.
	  303. Tikaramji  [1956] SCR  393 at  424-425.	Deep
	  Chand v. State of U.P. [1959] Suppl. 2 SCR p. 8 at
	  43. Ex-Parte	Mclean [1930]  43 C.L.R.  472 at 483
	  and the  observations of  Justice B.N.  Rau in the
	  Calcutta decision  of	 G.P.  Stewart	v.  B.K	 Roy
	  Choudhury (AIR  1939 Cal  628 at 634). As Sir B.N.
	  Rau mentioned in Stewart v. Brogendra Kishore- the
	  principles deducible	from these cases seem to be-
	  if the  dominant law	has expressly  or  impliedly
	  evinced its  intention, an  intention to cover the
	  whole field,	then a	subordinate law	 in the same
	  field is  repugnant and,  therefore,	inoperative,
	  whether and  to what	extent in  a given  case the
	  dominant  law	  evinces  such	 an  intention	must
	  necessarily  depend	on  the	  language  of	 the
	  particular law.
     Applying these  tests, it	would be  apparent,  it	 was
submitted by the appellants that the State Act was repugnant
to the Central Act.
     It was  finally submitted	that in	 any  event  without
prejudice to  other submissions	 that so  far as tobacco was
concerned, no  service had  in fact  been  rendered  by	 the
market committees  nor could they in law be rendered because
of legal  constraints  imposed	by  the	 provisions  of	 the
Central Act  and, in  particular, section  12 and rule 35 of
the Tobacco  Board Rules, 1976. By virtue of section 12, the
Market Committees  could not  auction or  deal in tobacco at
all  unless   these  were   registered	with  the  Board  in
accordance with the Central Act.
     It was  evident from  the letters	dated 15.9.1983	 and
23.9.1983 at  pages 462	 and 466  of the Paper Book that the
market committees  had not  been and  even today  registered
under the  Central  Act	 and  were  therefore  incapable  of
rendering any  service at  all. For  this reason  there	 was
complete failure  of quid-pro-quo and therefore there cannot
be any	charge of  fees by  enacting  State  legislation  on
tobacco.
276
     It appears	 that the principles of repugnancy in Indian
Constitution are well-settled. These are as follow:
     (1)  A legislation,  which in  its pith  and substance,
	  falls within	any of	the entries of List I of the
	  Seventh Schedule  to the  Constitution,  would  be
	  exclusively	within	 the   competence   of	 the
	  Parliament.
     (2)  A legislation falling exclusively, in its pith and
	  sub stance,  within any  of the entries in List II
	  of the  Seventh  Schedule,  would  be	 within	 the
	  exclusive competence of the State Legislature.
     (3)  A Central  law which	in its	pith and  substance,
	  falls within	any entry  in List  I would be valid
	  even though it might contain incidental provisions
	  in List II which may contain ancilliary provisions
	  which	 might	 touch	on   an	 entry	 of  List  I
	  incidentally.
     (4)  A State  law, which  in its  pith  and  substance,
	  within any  entry in	List II	 would be valid even
	  though it  might incidentally touch upon a subject
	  falling within List I.
     (5)  A Central  law, which	 in its	 pith and substance,
	  dealt with  a subject falling within List Il would
	  be  bad   and	 ultra	 vires	 the   Constitution.
	  Similarly, a	State law  which  in  its  pith	 and
	  substance dealt  with a matter falling within List
	  I  would   be	 invalid   and	 ultra	 vires	 the
	  Constitution.
     (6)  The concept  of repugnancy arises only with regard
	  to laws  dealing  with  subjects  covered  by	 the
	  entries falling  in List  III in  respect of which
	  both	parliament   and   State   Legislature	 are
	  competent to	legislate. Under  Article 254 of the
	  Constitution, a  State law  passed in respect of a
	  subject matter  comprised in	List  III  would  be
	  invalid if  its provisions were repugnant to a law
	  passed on  the same  subject	by  Parliament.	 The
	  repugnancy arose  only if  both the laws could not
	  exist together.  Repugnancy does  not arise simply
	  because Parliament and the States pass' law on the
	  same subject. There cannot be any
277
	  repugnancy in	 respect of  State  laws  passed  in
	  respect of  matter falling  pith and	substance in
	  List II  or in A respect of Central laws passed on
	  subject  falling  in	List  I.  Parliament  cannot
	  legislate on	a State	 subject  and  Slate  cannot
	  legislate on a Central subject. If either trenches
	  upon the  field of  the other,  law will  be ultra
	  vires.  See	in  this   connection  M/s   Hoechst
	  Pharmaceuticals Ltd.	& Others  Etc. v.  State  of
	  Bihar and  Others (1) etc., Ramesh Chandra Etc. v.
	  State of  U.P, Etc.  (supra) at  page 135  and The
	  Calcutta Gas	Company (Proprietary)  Ltd.  v.	 The
	  State of  West Bengal and Others.(a) Like entry 25
	  of  List   II-Gas  and   Gas	 Works-without	 any
	  limitation of	 entry 28  in List  II-in respect of
	  any legislation  which is  in substance  and	true
	  nature deals	with 'markets  and fairs'  read with
	  entry 66  of the said List has complete ascendency
	  and there cannot be any intrusion of that filed by
	  another   entry-See	in   this   connection	 the
	  discussion on	 "Union &  State Relation  under the
	  Indian Constitution"-M.C.  Setalvad-p. 48,  49. In
	  Calcutta Gas	Company's case (supra) by comparison
	  of entry 7 and entry 52 of List I with entry 25 of
	  List Il,  this Court	upheld State  legislation of
	  take over the Gas industry in spite of declaration
	  under entry 52.
     In the  present case  the Karnataka Marketing Act deals
with the subject of market in entry 28 read with entry 66 of
List II.  Such Acts  are covered  by entry  28	of  List  II
exclusively unlike  entries 23,24,26 and 27. It is important
to bear	 in mind  that entry 28 is not subject to withdrawal
into List I by Parliament as under entries 52 and 54 of List
I and  entry 33	 of List  III. The  State Act  is not  on  a
subject in  List III - nor is the Central Act a law relating
to any	subject in  List III. Therefore, there cannot be any
question of  repugnancy. Section 31 of the Central Act makes
it clear  that it  does not derogate from any law but enacts
something in addition.
     In the  High Court,  counter-affidavits were  filed  to
establish the  quid-pro-quo and rendering of the services to
the traders including
(1) [1983] 4 S.C.C. 45.
(2) [1962] 3 Supp. S.C.R. 1.
278
tobacco merchants  by the  respective six market committees.
In fact	 A before  the High  Court,  no	 contention,  as  it
appears from  the judgment  impugned, was at all advanced on
the question  of services  to tobacco  trade in	 the markets
concerned. In fact they are entitled to the same services as
other traders  as provided by the Act. The provisions of the
Marketing Act  and Tobacco  Board Act  and the Rules are not
inconsistent.
     It is  therefore necessary	 to note the true nature and
character of  the Acts	namely	the  Karnataka	Agricultural
Produce	 Marketing  Act,  1966	and  the  Central  Act.	 The
Marketing Act  is an  Act as  the preamble  states, for	 the
better regulating  of buying  and  selling  of	agricultural
produce and  establishment and	a administration  of markets
for  agricultural   produce  and   whereas  it	was  thought
expedient to provide for the better regulation of buying and
selling agriculture produce and establishment of markets for
agricultural produce  and matters  connected therewith	that
the State  Act was  passed. I have noted some of the salient
features of  the Act.  The Act	was to regulate the sale and
purchase  of   agricultural  produce   and   'tobacco'	 was
introduced by  Act 17  of 1980	as one	of the	agricultural
produces and  thereby it was sought to be brought within its
purview. The Act constituted different market committees. It
laid down the functions, duties of the market committees and
matters incidental thereto. It imposed obligations to impose
fees for  better maintenance  of markets, in other words for
better administration of markets. The Central Act was an Act
to provide for the control of the union of tobacco industry.
How better to control the industry of tobacco was the object
of the	Center11 Act.  For this	 purpose I  have noted	the
salient features  of the  Act, the  functions and  duties of
Tobacco Board,	the regulation of production and disposal of
virginia tobacco.
     Clause (cc)  of sub-section  (2) of  section 8  of	 the
Central Act  authorised	 the  Board  to	 establish  auction)
platforms with	the approval  of the  Central Government for
sale of	 tobacco and  for the functioning of the Board as an
auctioneer  and	  that	the   platforms	 established  by  or
registered with	 the Board subject to such conditions as may
be specified  by the  Central Government-  Section 12 of the
Central Act  provides that no person shall export tobacco or
any tobacco products or function as a packer, auctioneer of,
or dealer  in, tobacco unless the registers himself with the
Board in  accordance with  the Rules  made  under  the	Act.
Section 13  of the  Central Act	 states that  no  registered
grower or curer shall sell or cause to be sold virginia
279
tobacco elsewhere  than at  an auction	platform  registered
with the  Board in accordance with the rules made under this
Act or	established by	the Board under this Act. Section 31
of the Central Act specifically mentions that the same is in
addition to, and not in derogation of, the provisions of any
other law  for the  time being in force. Tobacco was brought
within the  marketing Act  in 1980  and section	 13  of	 the
Tobacco Board  Act, 1975 was made applicable in the State of
Karnataka only	on 31st	 August, 1984  by  the	notification
referred to  hereinbefore. Therefore essentially the Central
Act was	 for the development of the industry of tobacco and,
incidentally, certain  provisions for better sale of tobacco
through certain	 auction platforms  had been  made. There is
nothing in the Act or in the Rules which indicate that it is
inconsistent with  or cannot  be  operated  along  with	 the
marketing regulations.	It is  true that  for  this  purpose
certain sanction under the Act is required.
     Rule  35  of  the	Tobacco	 Board	Rules  provides	 for
registration as	 exporter, or  packer Of  auctioneer  of  or
dealer in  tobacco and	lays  down  certain  provisions.  By
virtue	of  section  12	 of  the  Central  Act,	 the  market
committees cannot auction or deal with tobacco at all unless
they are  registered with  the Board  in accordance with the
Act.
     In a  letter written  on 15.9.1983	 in  respect  of  an
application made  by the  Marketing Committee, Honsur, State
of Karnataka,  the Tobacco  Board refused the-application on
certain grounds	 mentioned in  that letter.  That  indicated
that it	 was thought that the Market committees should apply
to the	Tobacco Board  for  registration,  yet	on  13th  of
October, 1983, Tobacco Board applied to the Market committee
for the	 grant of  licence to it. The position is not clear-
but it is fully manifest that both Acts can operate in their
respective fields  and there  is no  repugnancy if  both the
Acts are  considered in	 the light  of their respective true
nature and  character. While  giving due  weight to Centre's
supremacy  in	the  matters  of  legislation,	the  States'
legitimate sphere of legislation should not be unnecessarily
whittled down-because  that  would  be	unwarranted  by	 the
spirit and  basic purpose  of the constitutional division of
powers-not merely  allocation of  power by  the Constitution
but invasion  by Parliamentary	legislations. If in spite of
declaration under  entries 7  and 54 of List I in respect of
Gas, the  State Legislature  can  still	 legislate  for	 the
nationalisation of  Gas industry as was held in Calcutta Co.
(Prop.) Ltd v. State of West Bengal (supra) because entry 25
of
280
List II,  it cannot  be said  that no legislation regulating
the market  A can be done by the State of Karnataka in spite
of entry  28 read  with entry  66  of  List  II	 because  of
declaration under  entry 52  of List I in respect of tobacco
industry. That	would be inconsistent and illogical See also
P.D. Shamdaswami v. Central Bank of India.(l)
     While it  is true	that in	 the spheres  very carefully
delineated  the	  Parliament  has   supremacy	over   State
Legislatures, supremacy	 in the	 the  sense  that  in  those
fields, Parliamentary  legislation would hold the field ands
not  the   State  legislation-but   to	denude	 the   State
Legislature of	its power to legislate where the legislation
in question  in pith  and substance  i.e. in its true nature
and character,	belongs to  the State  field, one  should be
chary to  denude the  State of	its powers  to legislate and
mobilise resources-because  that would be destructive of the
spirit and  purpose of India being a Union of States. States
must have  power to  raise and	mobilise resources  in their
exclusive fields.  In the instant case by complying with the
State Act. the Central Act can function to serve the purpose
and object  of the  Central Act, but if only the Central Act
was to	prevail, the State Act of marketing for coffee would
become non  est-wholly unnecessary  and undesirable  result.
The Marketing  Act is  essentially an  Act to  regulate	 the
marketing  of	agricultural  produce,	 control  of  coffee
industry would not be defeated if the marketing of coffee is
done within  the provisions  of the  Marketing Act.  It must
therefore be  held that	 the State  Act should	prevail. One
should avoid  corroding	 the  State's  ambit  of  powers  of
legislations which  will ultimately lead to erosion of India
being a Union of States.
     The contentions  OD behalf of the appellants therefore,
on this	 point have  to be rejected. As to who should obtain
licence or as to who would have to be registered, the Market
Committee or the Tobacco Board is a question which should be
settled by proper adjudication.
     Some argument  has been built upon the fact that though
more or less identical in nature, in respect of the Cardamom
Act, 1965,  it was  held that  the State Legislature was not
competent to  enact the	 Cardamom Act,	1965 in	 view of the
declaration  under  entry  52  of  List	 I  of	the  Seventh
Schedule. It  was therefore  suggested that  it would not be
correct to take inconsistent views in respect of this Act
     (1) [1952] S.C.R. 391 at 394.
281
as against  the Tobacco	 Board Act.  As noticed	 before, the
contention of  validity of the Cardamom Act on the ground of
entry 28  of A	List II	 of the	 Seventh  Schedule  was	 not
canvassed. Furthermore, it was held that the rules under the
Cardamom Act  which were  framed were  in variance  with the
present Act. The Government had accepted the findings of the
High Court  so far as Cardamom Act is concerned. Had it been
otherwise and  had it  been examined  by this  Court for the
reasons which  are noted  herein, what	would have  been the
result it  is difficult	 to state.  In any  event,  in	this
background that	 cannot be  any reason far less a compelling
reason to  hold	 that  Tobacco	Board  Act  was	 within	 the
competence  of	 the  State   Legislature  for	the  reasons
indicated in  this judgment.  Therefore that  cannot be	 any
argument for consideration at all.
     In so  far as  the High  Court directed  the refund  as
indicated before,  the appeals by the Government are allowed
to that	 extent and  the orders	 of the	 High Court  are set
aside. The  other appeals  by  the  parties,  are,  for	 the
reasons mentioned hereinbefore, dismissed. Parties will bear
and pay their own costs throughout.
     In	 view  of  the	majority  decision,  all  the  civil
appeals, special  leave petitions  and writ  petition except
civil appeal  No. 629 of 1983 (Karnataka Market Fee matters)
are dismissed without any order as to costs.
     Civil appeal  No.629 of 1983(I.T.C.) however is allowed
and the judgment of the High Court is set aside. There will,
however be  no order  as to  costs in  this case and any fee
realised will not be refunded.
M.L.A.			    Appeals and Petitions dismissed.
282
