

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Narayan Singh & Ors vs State Of Madhya Pradesh on 19 July, 1985Equivalent citations: 1985 AIR 1678, 1985 SCR  Supl. (2) 319
Author: S M Fazalali
Bench: Fazalali, Syed Murtaza
           PETITIONER:
NARAYAN SINGH & ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH

DATE OF JUDGMENT19/07/1985

BENCH:
FAZALALI, SYED MURTAZA
BENCH:
FAZALALI, SYED MURTAZA
VARADARAJAN, A. (J)

CITATION:
 1985 AIR 1678		  1985 SCR  Supl. (2) 319
 1985 SCC  (4)	26	  1985 SCALE  (2)76


ACT:
     Evidence	  Act-Murder-Extra-judicial	 Confession-
Admissibility of-Circumstances	when conviction can be based
upon it.



HEADNOTE:
     There was	a chronic  land dispute between the deceased
and  the  appellants.  While  the  deceased  was  proceeding
towards	 his  village  along  with  PW	11,  the  appellants
assaulted him with swords and farsis as a result of which he
succumbed to  his injuries. The first information Report was
lodged promptly. The Sessions Judge acquitted the accused on
the grounds: (i) that PW 11 who was sole eye-witness and had
seen the  occurrence, did not immediately disclose the names
of the	accused to  the inmate of the family of the deceased
when he	 went to  the house  and therefore  this was a fatal
defect in  the prosecution  case from  which an irresistible
inference could	 be drawn  that PW  11 could never have seen
the occurrence;	 and (ii)  that the  evidence of  PW 5 and 9
constituting an	 extra-judicial confession  is a  very	weak
type of	 evidence. On  appeal by  the State,  the High Court
reversed the  judgment of  the Sessions	 Judge and convicted
the accused  under ss. 148 and 302 read with sec. 149 of the
IPC.
     Dismissing the appeal by the appellants,
^
     HELD: 1.  It is  true that	 the Supreme  Court has held
that where  two views  are reasonably possible, the order of
acquittal should  not be  disturbed. However, in the instant
case, taking an overall picture of the evidence of PWs. 5, 9
and 11	and the recoveries of the weapons at the instance of
the accused, there is no doubt that this is a fit and proper
case for  interference by  the High  Court in  reversing the
Judgment of  the Sessions  Judge and convicting the accused.
[323 G-H]
     2. The  learned Sessions  Judge seems  to have  taken a
most unrealistic  view of  the evidence of PW 11 by ignoring
the fact  that PW 11 being a guard of the deceased must have
been shocked
320
and stunned  after seeing the whole incident and, therefore,
he may	not have  been in a position to mention the names of
the accused  immediately but  after composing himself within
10-15 minutes  he mentioned  the names and also gave all the
details. PW  11 appears to be truthful witness as he himself
admits that  he could not immediately give the names because
he  was	  perplexed  and   it  is   quite  a  natural  thing
particularly in the case of person coming from the strata of
society of which PW 11 was a member. [322 E-G]
     3. It  is not  open  to  any  court  to  start  with  a
presumption that extra judicial confession is a weak type of
evidence.  It	would  depend	on   the   nature   of	 the
circumstances, the time when the confession was made and the
credibility of the witnesses who speak to such a confession.
[323 B-C]
     In the instant case, after perusing the evidence of PWs
5 and  9 who stated on oath that one of the accused admitted
before them  that he  had murdered  the deceased,  there  is
nothing which  could  lead  to	the  conclusion	 that  these
independent  witnesses	were  not  telling  the	 truth.	 The
evidence of  these two	witnesses which lends support to the
evidence of  PW 11  was sufficient to warrant the conviction
of the	accused. Moreover  the accused had made a confession
before the  police and	on the	basis of their statements, a
blood-stained farsi  and sword	were  recovered	 which	were
found to  contain human blood. This circumstance, therefore,
reinforces  both   the	extra-judicial	confession  and	 the
evidence of  PW 11.  The Sessions  Judge, however,  did	 not
attach	much   importance  to	the  recoveries	  which	 are
undoubtedly admissible	under the  Evidence Act and afford a
guarantee to the truth of the prosecution case. [323 C-E]



JUDGMENT:
     CRIMINAL APPELLATE	 JURISDICTION : Criminal Appeal Nos.
308 & 420 of 1976.
     From the  Judgment and  Order dated  24.2.1976  of	 the
Madhya Pradesh	High Court  in Criminal	 Appeal No.  300  of
1972.
     S.K. Gambhir for the Appellants.
     Ravinder Bana and A.K. Sanghi for the Respondent.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     FAZAL ALI,	 J. These  appeals are	directed  against  a
judgment of  the Madhya	 Pradesh High  Court convicting	 the
appellants under
321
ss. 148	 and 302  read with  s. 149 of the Indian Penal Code
and sentencing them to imprisonment for life.
     By our Order dated 12th July 1985, we had dismissed the
appeals. We now proceed to give reasons for our Order.
     The facts	of  the	 case  have  been  detailed  in	 the
Judgments of the Sessions Judge and the High Court and it is
not necessary  for us  to repeat the same all over again. It
appears that  there  was  a  chronic  land  dispute  between
Bhojraj (deceased)  and	 the  appellants  so  much  so	that
Bhojraj had  to enlist	the services of one Abbas (PW 11) to
accompany him  wherever he  went so  as to guard him against
assault. This  means  that  the	 deceased  expected  serious
threat to  his life from the appellants due to the aforesaid
enmity. On  October 5, 1971 at about 2.30 p.m. While Bhojraj
was proceeding	towards his  village, accompanied  by PW 11,
the appellants reached the place of occurrence alongwith 5-6
persons and  assaulted Bhojraj	with swords  and farsis as a
result of which Bhojraj succumbed to his injuries. PW 1, who
was not	 an eye-witness,  on hearing of the incident reached
the police  station at	4.30 p.m.  and	lodged	a  FIR.	 The
distance of  the police station from the place of occurrence
was about  10 miles.  As the  incident took  place at  about
2.30. p.m. and the report was lodged within two hours, there
can be	no doubt  that the  report was	made  promptly	and,
therefore,  the	 question  of  concocting  the	case  cannot
possibly arise.
     In support	 of the prosecution, the evidence led may be
classified into three categories -
	  (1) the  evidence of PW 11 (Abbas) who was a guard
	  of the  deceased and,	 as usual,  was accompanying
	  his master,  Bhojraj, and  saw the entire incident
	  himself,
	  (2) one  of the  accused seems  to  have  made  an
	  extra-judicial confession  to	 PWs  5	 and  9	 and
	  admitted that he assaulted the deceased with sword
	  and farsi, and
	  (3) at  the instance of the accused, blood-stained
	  weapons were recovered which, after being examined
	  by serologist, were found to contain human blood.
The learned Sessions Judge rejected the prosecution case
322
for paucity of evidence and acquitted the accused. The State
then filed  an appeal  before the  High Court  which,  after
careful examination  of the  evidence, reversed the judgment
of the	Sessions Judge	and convicted  the accused under ss.
148 and	 302, read with s.149 of the IPC. Hence, this appeal
to this Court under s.2 of the Supreme Court (Enlargement of
Criminal Appellate Jurisdiction) Act, 1970.
     The learned  Sessions Judge  was mainly  swayed by	 the
consideration that  PW 11,  who was the sole eye-witness and
had seen  the occurrence,  did not  immediately disclose the
names of  the accused  to the  inmates of  the family of the
deceased when  he went	to the	house. On this ground alone,
the Sessions  Judge thought  that this was a fatal defect in
the prosecution	 case from  which an  irresistible inference
could be  drawn	 that  PW  11  could  never  have  seen	 the
occurrence. We	have gone  through the evidence of PW 11 and
we feel	 that the  Sessions Judge was not at all correct. It
was not	 the case  that PW 11 never disclosed the details of
the incident  to the  members of  the family of the deceased
but when  he went  to the  house he immediately did not name
the accused  and the  explanation given by PW 11 was that as
he was	completely  perplexed  he  could  not  disclose	 the
details immediately. The evidence of PW 11 shows that within
15 minutes  he disclosed  the names  of the accused and gave
full details  of the  occurrence. The learned Sessions Judge
seems to  have taken a most unrealistic view of the evidence
of PW  11 by ignoring the fact that he (PW 11) being a guard
of the	deceased must  have been  shocked and  stunned after
seeing the  whole incident  and, therefore,  he may not have
been in	 a position  to mention	 the names  of	the  accused
immediately but after composing himself within 10-15 minutes
he mentioned  the names	 and also  gave all the details. The
presence of  PW 11 at the scene at the time of the attack on
the deceased  was not  challenged before us. Nor could it be
challenged, for	 the suggestion	 made to PW 11, which he has
denied that  he himself	 had attacked  the deceased.  PW  11
appears to  be a  truthful witness as he himself admits that
he could  not immediately  given the  names because  he	 was
perplexed and  it is  quite a  natural thing particularly in
the case  of a	person coming  from the strata of society of
which PW  11 was  a member.  It is  not uncommon for persons
when they see a ghastly and dastardly murder being committed
in their  presence that	 they almost  lose  their  sense  of
balance and  remain dumb-founded  until	 they  are  able  to
compose themselves.  This is  exactly what may have happened
to PW 11.
323
     Apart from	 this there  is the  evidence of PWs 5 and 9
who state  on oath  that one  of the accused admitted before
them that he had murdered the deceased. The learned Sessions
Judge has  brushed aside  their evidence  by presuming	that
their statements  constituting an  extra-judicial confession
is a very weak type of evidence. This is a wrong view of the
law. It is not open to any court to start with a presumption
that extra  judicial confession	 is a weak type of evidence.
It would depend on the nature of the circumstances, the time
when the  confession was  made and  the credibility  of	 the
witnesses who  speak to	 such a	 confession. In	 the instant
case, after  perusing the  evidence of	PWs 5  and 9  we are
unable to  find anything  which could lead to the conclusion
that these independent witnesses were not telling the truth.
The evidence  of these	two witnesses  (PWs 5  and 9)  which
lends support  to the  evidence of  PW 11  was sufficient to
warrant the  conviction of  the accused.  The Sessions Judge
has  committed	a  grave  error	 of  law  in  analysing	 and
appreciating the  evidence of  PWs 5 and 9 and brushing them
aside on untenable grounds.
     The matter	 does not  rest here  alone but	 it is clear
from the  evidence that	 the accused  had made	a confession
before the  police and	on the	basis of their statements, a
blood-stained farsi  and a  sword were	recovered which were
found to  contain human	 blood as  mentioned  earlier.	This
circumstance, therefore,  reinforces both the extra-judicial
confession and	the evidence  of PW  11. The Sessions Judge,
however, did  not attach  much importance  to the recoveries
which are  undoubtedly admissible under the Evidence Act and
afford a guarantee to the truth of the prosecution case.
     Thus, taking  an overall picture of the evidence of PWs
5, 9  and 11  and the  recoveries  of  the  weapons  at	 the
instance of  the accused, we are of the opinion that this is
an open	 and shut  case against	 the accused and the learned
Sessions Judge	has committed  error  of  law  and  has	 not
properly appreciated the evidence in its true perspective.
     It was  argued by	the counsel  for the appellants that
the Sessions Judge had taken a reasonable view, and the High
Court ought  not to  have interfered.  It is  true that this
Court has held that where two views are reasonably possible,
the order  of acquittal	 should not  be disturbed.  In	this
case, however,	we are	fully satisfied that the judgment of
the  Sessions	Judge  was   absolutely	 perverse,   legally
erroneous and based on wrong assumptions and, hence, this is
a fit  and proper case for interference by the High Court in
reversing the  judgment of the Sessions Judge and convicting
the accused.
324
     For the aforesaid reasons, we uphold the conviction and
sentence imposed  by the High Court and dismiss the appeals.
In case	 the appellants are on bail, they shall surrender to
their bail  bonds which are hereby cancelled and they should
be taken  into custody	and sent  to jail  to serve  out the
remaining portion of the sentence.
M.L.A.					  Appeals dismissed.
325




