

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Ministry Of Labour & ... vs Tiffin'S Barytes Asbestos & ... on 16 July, 1985Equivalent citations: 1985 AIR 1391, 1985 SCR  Supl. (2) 302
Author: O C Reddy
Bench: Reddy, O. Chinnappa (J)
           PETITIONER:
MINISTRY OF LABOUR & REHABILITATION & ANOTHER.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
TIFFIN'S BARYTES ASBESTOS & PAINTS LTD. & ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT16/07/1985

BENCH:
REDDY, O. CHINNAPPA (J)
BENCH:
REDDY, O. CHINNAPPA (J)
ERADI, V. BALAKRISHNA (J)
KHALID, V. (J)

CITATION:
 1985 AIR 1391		  1985 SCR  Supl. (2) 302
 1985 SCC  (3) 594	  1985 SCALE  (2)56


ACT:
     Minimum  Wages   Act  1948,   ss.	5(a)  (9)  and	9  -
Appointment  of	  Committee  to	 advise	 the  Government  of
fixation of  minimum wages  in certain	mines  -  Government
officials and  persons not  belonging to the concerned mines
appointed as members Government officials, when 'independent
persons' as  contemplated by  s. 9. Whether it is their duty
to implement  the provisions  of the  Act and the Government
being not  an employer	- Employers  representatives in	 the
committee -  Whether should  be engaged	 for profit  in	 the
particular employment.



HEADNOTE:
     After  considering	  the  advice	of  the	  Committee,
appointed under	 ss. 5(1)(a)  and 9 of the Minimum Wages Act
1948, the Government of India by a Notification issued under
the Act	 fixed the minimum rates of wages payable to certain
categories of  employees  in  the  scheduled  employment  in
certain mines.	The mine-owners	 challenged the notification
under Article  226 of  the Constitution	 and  the  same	 was
quashed by  the High  Court on the ground that the Committee
on whose  advice the  Notification was	based was improperly
constituted for	 two reasons:  (1)  that  the  Chief  Labour
Commissioner  (Central)	  New  Delhi  and  Director,  Labour
Bureau, Simla,	were  Government  employees  in	 the  Labour
Department and	were, therefore,  not truly 'independent' so
as  to	 be  eligible  to  be  appointed  to  the  Committee
constituted under ss.5 and 9 of the Act and (2) that the so-
called representatives	of the	employers on  the  Committee
were not  representatives of the named mining industries and
were, therefore, ineligible to be appointed to the Committee
to represent  the  employers  of  the  particular  scheduled
employments.
     Allowing the appeal of the Union of India,
^
     HELD: 1.  The Government  employees, who  are entrusted
with the  task of implementing the provisions of the Minimum
Wages Act  1948, cannot,  for  that  reason,  be  dubbed  as
interested and	not independent persons. In a case where the
Government  itself   is	 not   an  employer   there  is	  no
justification for  holding that	 Government employees become
'interested persons' contemplated by
303
s. 9  of the  Act are  persons who  belong  neither  to	 the
category of  employers nor  to the category of employees and
there is  no reason  to think  that Government employees are
excluded. The  term 'independent  persons', is	used in	 the
section	 in   contradistinction	 to   the   words   'persons
representing  employers	  and  employees  in  the  scheduled
employments'. [305 F-H, 306 A-B]
     Narottamdas v.  Gowarikar &  Ors. [1961]  (1) LLJ	442;
Kohinoor Pictures (Pvt.) Ltd. v. State of West Bengal [1961]
(2) LLJ	 741 and  Bansi Lal  S. Patel  v.  State  of  Andhra
Pradesh [1965] 1 LLJ 28 overruled.
     Jaswant Rai  v. State  of Punjab A.I.R. 1958 Punjab 425
and Digvijaysinghji  Salt Works Ltd. v. State of Gujarat AIR
1971 Gujarat 14 approved.
     State of  Rajasthan v.  Hari Ram Nathwani & Ors. [1976]
(1) SCR 641 not applicable.
     2. The  persons appointed to the Committee to represent
the  employers	 were  eligible	  to  be  appointed  to	 the
committee. The scheduled employments in the instant case are
employment in  Gypsum, Barytes, Bauxite and Manganese mines.
For the	 purpose of  appointing a Committee to represent the
employers in  the scheduled employment, it was not necessary
that the  persons appointed  should be engaged for profit in
the particular	employment. It	is enough  if a nexus exists
between the  persons so appointed to represent the employers
in the	particular employment  and the particular employment
concerned. There  was no  material before the High Court nor
was the	 High Court  in a  position to	say that the persons
appointed to  the Committee  to represent the employers were
entirely unconnected  with or  ignorant	 of  the  particular
employment. It	is not	understood how	by merely looking at
their names  and the  position occupied	 by them,  the	High
Court  was  able  to  say  that	 they  were  incompetent  to
represent the  employers in  the particular employments. The
representatives of  the employers consisted of Controller of
the  Indian  Bureau  of	 Mines,	 Secretary  General  of	 the
Federation of  the Indian  Mining Industries,  President  of
Mysore State  Mine Owners  Association, etc.  etc. All these
persons are  intimately connected  with the  mining industry
and it has not been shown that they were unconnected with or
ignorant of  the particular  scheduled employments in mines.
It is  impossible to uphold the view of the High Court. [306
D-H, 306 A-E]
     Champak Lal  H. Thakkar  v. State of Gujarat [1980] (4)
SCC 329 not applicable.
304
     3. Notifications  fixing minimum  ages  should  not  be
lightly	 interfered   with  under   Article   226   of	 the
Constitution except on the most substantial grounds. [307 G]



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION : Civil Appeal No. 589 of
1972.
     From the  Judgment and  Order  dated  8.7.1971  of	 the
Andhra Pradesh High Court in W.P. No. 3980 of 1969.
			    AND
	     Civil Appeals Nos 541-546 of 1973
     From the  Judgment and  Order dated  23.8.1971  of	 the
Andhra	  Pradesh     High    Court	in     W.P.	Nos.
1526,1624,3198,3199,3200 & 3210 of 1970.
     G. Das,  P.P. Singh,  R.N.Poddar, for the Appellants in
C.A. No. 589(N) of 1978.
     Respondent No.  1 in  person. (not present) in C.A. No.
589(N) of 1972.
     R.N. Poddar  and Mrs. Indira Sawhney for the Appellants
in C.A. Nos. 541-546 of 1972.
     Dr. Anand	Prakash, Naunit Lal, Kailash Vasdev and Mrs.
Vinod Arya for the Respondents in C.A. Nos. 541-546 of 1972.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     CHINNAPPA REDDY,  J. On October 16, 1968 the Government
of India, Ministry of Labour, Employment and Rehabilitation,
issued a  notification, in  exercise of	 their powers  under
section 5(1)  (a) and 9 of the Minimum Wages Act, appointing
a Committee  "to  hold	enquiries  and	advise	the  Central
Government regarding  -
(a) the	 fixation of  minimum rates  of wages  for the first
time under the said Act, and
(b) the	 revision of minimum rates of wages already fixed by
the Central Government under the said Act,"
in respect  of the  Employment in Manganese, Gypsum, Berytes
and  Bauxite   Mines,  Shri  D.Venkatachalam,  Chief  Labour
Commissioner
305
(Central), New	Delhi and  Shri K.K.Bhatia, Director, Labour
Bureau, Simla  were appointed  as independent members of the
Committee while	 (i) Shri K.S.Mahaptra, Controller of Indian
Bureau of  Mines, Nagpur,  (ii) Shri  Dev Coomer Singhi, The
Jhagrakhand Collieries	Private Ltd.,  14/4, Gariaghat Road,
Calcutta-19, (iii)  Dr. S.K.Das	 Gupta, Indian Aluminium Co.
Ltd.,  1,  Middleton  Street,  Calcutta-16  (iv)  Shri	T.R.
Goenka, Honorary  Secretary General,  Federation  of  Indian
Mining Industries,  7, N.D.S.E.	 Part I, New Delhi-3 and (v)
Mr. S.G.A.  Naidu, President  of Mysore	 State Mine  Owners'
Association, Bangalore, were appointed as representatives of
the  employers.	 Five  other  gentlemen	 were  appointed  as
members	 of   the  Committee  to  represent  the  employees.
Thereafter, on May 19, 1969, after considering the advice of
the Committee, the Government of India issued a notification
fixing minimum	rates of wages payable to certain categories
of  employees	in  the	 scheduled  employment	in  Barytes,
Bauxite, Manganese and Gypsum Mines. The notification fixing
minimum wages  was questioned  by several owners of mines in
writ petitions	filed in  the High  Court of Andhra Pradesh.
The notification  was quashed  by the  High Court  of Andhra
Pradesh on  the ground that the Committee on whose advice it
was based  was improperly  constituted for two reasons : (1)
Shri Venkatachalam  and Shri  K.K.  Bhatia  were  Government
employees in  the Labour Department and were, therefore, not
truly "independent'  so as to be eligible to be appointed to
the Committee  constituted under  sections 5  and 9  of	 the
Minimum Wages  Act and; (2) The so called representatives of
the  employers	on  the	 Committee  as	appointed  were	 not
representatives	 of  the  Barytes,  Bauxite,  Manganese	 and
Gypsum mining  industries and they were therefore ineligible
to be  appointed to the Committee to represent the employers
of the particular scheduled employments.
     We are  afraid, we	 are unable to subscribe to the view
taken  by   the	 High  Court.  In  our	opinion,  Government
employees, who	are entrusted  with the task of implementing
the provisions	of the	Minimum Wages  Act, cannot, for that
reason, be dubbed as interested and not independent persons.
It may	be that in a case where the Government itself is the
employer in  the particular  scheduled employment, it may be
possible  to   urge  that   Government	employees   are	 not
independent persons (we express no opinion on that) but in a
case where  the Government  itself is not an employer, we do
not  see  any  justification  for  holding  that  Government
employees who  are interested  in the  implementation of the
Minimum Wages  Act, for that reason only, become 'interested
persons' and  cease  to	 be  independent.  The	'independent
persons' contemplated  by s.9  of the  Act are	persons	 who
belong neither to the category
306
of employers  nor to the category of employees, and there is
no reason  to think  that Government employees whose task is
merely to  implement Parliamentary Legislation made pursuant
to Directive  Principles of  State Policy  and	the  State's
social obligations  in that direction are excluded. The term
'independent persons', it must be emphasised, is used in the
section	 in   contra  distinction   to	the  words'  persons
representing  employers	  and  employees  in  the  scheduled
employments'. We  disagree with	 the view  expressed by	 the
Madhya Pradesh High Court in Narottamdas v. Gowarikar & Ors.
[1961] 1  L.L.J. 442  and Calcutta  High Court	in  Kohinoor
Pictures (Pvt.) Ltd. v. State of West Bengal [1961] 2 L.L.J.
741 and	 the Andhra Pradesh High Court in Bansi Lal S. Patel
v. State of Andhra Pradesh [1965] 1 L.L.J. 28. We agree with
the view  taken by  the Punjab	High Court in Jaswant Rai v.
State of  Punjab A.I.R. 1958 Punjab 425 and the Gujarat High
Court in  the Digvijaysingji  Salt Works  Ltd. v.  State  of
Gujarat A.I.R.	1971 Gujarat  14. The decision of this Court
in State  of Rajasthan	v. Hari Ram Nathwani & Ors. [1976] 1
S.C.R. 641 does not assist either party.
     There is  equally no  substance in the other contention
which found  favour with  the High  Court, namely,  that the
persons	 appointed   to	 the   Committee  to  represent	 the
employers were	ineligible to  be appointed to the Committee
as they	 did  not  represent  employers	 in  the  particular
scheduled employment.  The scheduled  employments with which
we are	concerned are employment in Gypsum mines, employment
in Barytes mines, employment in Bauxite mines and employment
in manganese  mines. It	 is not	 explained why	the  persons
appointed to  the Committee  to represent  the employers are
ineligible  to	 represent  employers	in   the   scheduled
employments. The High Court merely says "on a perusal of the
names of  the employers'  representatives, we find that none
of them can be said to be the representatives of the Barytes
mines. When the minimum wages of the categories of employees
are to	be fixed  in respect  of Barytes  mines, there is no
point	in   appointing	  the	representatives	  of   other
employments. The  Government in	 its counter  has not stated
that any  of the  employers' representatives,  who have been
nominated to  the Committee,  are the representatives of the
Barytes mines. The learned counsel appearing for the Central
Government also	 has not  been able to point out whether any
one of	those  nominees	 of  the  Government  as  employers'
representatives really	represent the  Barytes mines  or has
got expert  knowledge of  the employers	 and  their  working
conditions in  the scheduled  employments of  Barytes mines.
We, therefore, hold that the composition of the Committee is
defective in  respect of  the nominations  of the  employers
representatives. This is sufficient to
307
quash the  notification which  is based	 upon the  advice of
such a	defectively and	 irregularly constituted Committee."
We are	afraid that  the approach  of  the  High  Court	 was
entirely wrong.	 For the purpose of appointing the Committee
to represent the employers in a scheduled employment, it was
not necessary  that the	 persons appointed should be engaged
for profit  in the  particular employment. It is enough if a
nexus exists  between the  persons so appointed to represent
the  employers	 in  the   particular  employment   and	 the
particular employment  concerned. For  example,	 it  may  be
absurd to  appoint persons engaged in the newspaper industry
to a  Committee to  represent  employers  concerned  in	 the
employment of  Barytes mines  or  Bauxite  mines.  The	case
before us  is not  one of  that nature	at all. There was no
material before	 the High  Court nor was the High Court in a
position to  say that the persons appointed to the Committee
to represent the employers were entirely unconnected with or
ignorant  of   the  particular	 employments.  We   fail  to
understand how	by merely  looking at  their names  and	 the
positions occupied  by them,  the High Court was able to say
that they were incompetent to represent the employers in the
particular employments. The first of them was the Controller
of the	Indian Bureau  of Mines,  another was  the Secretary
General of  the Federation  of Indian  Mining Industries and
yet another  was the  President of  the	 Mysore	 State	Mine
Owners' Association.  All of  them are	intimately connected
with the mining industry and it has not been shown that they
are unconnected with or ignorant of the particular scheduled
employments in	mines. We  find it  impossible to uphold the
view of	 the High  Court. The  decision	 of  this  Court  in
Champak Lal  Thakkar v. State of Gujarat [1980] 4 S.C.C.329,
is of  no assistance whatever. In the circumstances we allow
the appeals,  set aside	 the judgment  of the High Court and
dismiss the  Writ Petitions filed in the High Court. We also
wish to	 emphasise that	 notifications fixing  minimum wages
are not	 to be	lightly interfered with under Article 226 of
the Constitution on the ground of some irregularities in the
Constitution of the Committee or in the procedure adopted by
the Committee. It must be remembered that the Committee acts
only as	 a recommendatory  body and  the final	notification
fixing minimum	wages has  to be  made	by  the	 Government.
Notification fixing  minimum wages, in a country where wages
are already  minimum should  not be  interfered	 with  under
Article	 226   of  the	 Constitution  except  on  the	most
substantial of	grounds. The legislation is a social welfare
legislation undertaken	to further  the Directive Principles
of State  Policy and  action taken  pursuant to it cannot be
struck down on mere technicalities.
A.P.J.					    Appeals allowed.
308




