

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
P.A. Thillai Chidambara Nadar vs The Addl. Appellate Asstt. ... on 29 July, 1985Equivalent citations: 1985 AIR 1644, 1985 SCR  Supl. (2) 339
Author: V Tulzapurkar
Bench: Tulzapurkar, V.D.
           PETITIONER:
P.A. THILLAI CHIDAMBARA NADAR

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
THE ADDL. APPELLATE ASSTT. COMMISSIONER. MADURAI & ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT29/07/1985

BENCH:
TULZAPURKAR, V.D.
BENCH:
TULZAPURKAR, V.D.
MISRA RANGNATH
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)

CITATION:
 1985 AIR 1644		  1985 SCR  Supl. (2) 339
 1985 SCC  (4)	30	  1985 SCALE  (2)291
 CITATOR INFO :
 RF	    1991 SC 494	 (5)


ACT:
     Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act, 1959
     'Coconut' -  Whether 'fresh  fruit'  or  'vegetable'  -
Whether exempt from levy of sales tax.
     Words & Phrases
     'Coconut' - Whether 'fruit' or 'vegetable' - Tamil Nadu
General Sales Tax Act 1959.



HEADNOTE:
     Under G.P.	 No.  1764  dated  5.4.1960  as	 amended  on
22.12.1960 issued  under the  Tamil Nadu  General Sales	 Tax
Act,  1959   the  Government  had  exempted  "all  sales  of
vegetables (other  than the dried and dehydrated vegetables)
fresh fruits, betel and plantain leaves, flowers, eggs, meat
and fish  (other than canned meat and fish) from the levy of
sales tax under the Act."
     The High  Court, held  that since	ripened	 coconut  in
which the  appellant was  dealing as  a grocer, could not be
regarded  as   a  "fresh   fruit"  or	a  "vegetable",	 the
appellant's sales  turn-over  in  coconut  in  each  of	 the
Assessment Years  1967-68, 1968-69 and 1969-70 was liable to
sales tax and includible in its taxable turn-over.
     Dismissing the Appeals :
^
     HELD:  (by	  the  Court-per   Tulzapurkar,	  Sabyasachi
Mukharji and Ranganth Misra JJ.)
     1. The  High Court was right in its conclusion that the
appellant's sales  turnover in	coconut was  not exempt from
the levy of sales tax. [343 E, 344 G]
     2. In  interpreting items	in statutes  like the Excise
Tax Acts or Sales Tax Acts, whose primary object is to raise
revenue and for which purpose they classify diverse products
articles and  substances resort	 should be  had not  to	 the
scientific and technical meaning of the terms or expressions
used but  to their  popular meaning,  that is  to  say,	 the
meaning attached  to them  by those dealing in them. [342 C,
343 H]
340
     Indo International	 Industries v. Commissioner of Sales
Tax, Uttar Pradesh [1981] 3 S.C.R. 294 referred to.
     (Per Tulzapurkar, J.)
     1. It  cannot be  disputed that  a coconut	 would be  a
'fruit' in  the botanical sense but unless it can be said to
be a  'fresh fruit'  it will  not fall	within the exemption
notification. Similarly	 a coconut  may be  available  in  a
vegetable market  but because  of that	it does not become a
'vegetable. It	is well-known that the kernel of the coconut
is used	 as an	ingredient in  the culinary preparations for
adding taste  to the food on the table but it is hardly used
as a  substantial article  of  food  on	 the  table.  'Fresh
fruits'	 and   'vegetables'  being   household	articles  of
everyday use  will have	 to be	construed in  their  popular
sense, meaning	the sense  in which  every householder	will
understand them.  A householder	 when asked  to	 bring	some
'fresh fruit'  and some	 'vegetable' for  the  evening	meal
would obviously not bring coconut. [342 F-343 A]
     His Majesty  the King  v. Planters	 Nut  and  Chocolate
Company Limited. [1951] C.L.R. (Ex.) 122 and Commissioner of
Sales Tax  v. Jaswant Singh Charan Singh [1967] 2 S.C.R. 720
referred to.
     2. The  legislative history  of the  earlier  exemption
notifications issued  by the  State  Government	 are  of  no
assistance to the appellant. All these earlier notifications
clearly show  that coconut  was always	subject to sales tax
till G.P.  No. 1764 dated April 5, 1960 was issued under the
1959 Act.  There is  no material to show that the Government
had changed  its view  and exempted  coconut  from  taxation
under the  1959 Act.  Under the earlier notifications merely
'fruits' had  been exempted from levy of sales tax and since
coconut would  have come  within the category of fruits, the
same was  expressly  excluded  from  the  exemption  thereby
making the same thereof liable to tax. [343 B-D]
     (Per Sabyasachi Mukharji, J.)
     1. It  cannot be disputed that ripened coconut will not
be a  "fresh fruit"  in terms  of the said notification. One
cannot be sure on the aspect, that ripened coconut cannot be
considered to  be vegetable.  Whether ripened coconut can be
considered to be 'vegetable' or 'fruit' in any part of India
will depend upon the evidence available. Tastes vary, habits
differ, and food served,
341
prepared and  consumed at  the tables  in different parts of
the country  also vary.	 Therefore, it	is safer not to rest
the decision on subjective ideas if possible. [344 B-C]
     2. It  is for  the assessee  who  claims  exemption  to
adduce evidence	 that a	 particular article  is an  exempted
item, and  if he cannot or if he fails to do so, the revenue
may proceed  on its basis. In such a situation, the assessee
should have  such an opportunity. That opportunity cannot be
foreclosed. It	cannot categorically  be said  that  ripened
coconut could never be considered to be 'vegetable'. In this
case the assessee has adduced no evidence. [344 D-E]



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION : Civil Appeal Nos. 1434-
35 of 1973.
     From the  Judgment and  Order dated  20.12.1972 of	 the
Madras High  Court in  Writ Petitions  Nos. 1439 and 3425 of
1970.
			    AND
     Civil Appeal No. 1003 of 1975.
     From the  Judgment and  Order  dated  6.3.1974  of	 the
Madras High Court in T.C. No. 71 of 1974.
     J. Ramamurthy for the Appellant.
     S.T.Desai and A.V.Rangam for the Respondent.
     The following Judgments of the Court were delivered :
     TULZAPUKAR, J.  Whether a	coconut (neither  tender nor
dried but  a ripened  coconut with  or without	husk)  is  a
"fresh fruit"  or a "vegetable" so as to earn exemption from
the levy  of sales tax under G.G. No. 1764 dated 5.4.1960 as
amended on  22.12.1960 issued  under the  Tamil Nadu General
Sales Tax Act, 1959 is the question raised in these appeals.
     The High  Court  has  held	 that  under  the  aforesaid
notification the  Government  had  exempted  "all  sales  of
vegetables (other  than the dried and dehydrated vegetables)
fresh fruits, betal and plantain leaves, flowers, eggs, meat
and fish (other than canned meat and fish)" from the levy of
sales tax  under the 1959 Act but since a ripened coconut in
which the appellant was dealing as a
342
grocer, could  not be  regarded as  a  "fresh  fruit"  or  a
"vegetable" the	 appellant's sales  turn over in coconuts in
each of	 the Assessment	 Years 1967-68,	 1968-69 and 1969-70
was liable  to sales  tax  and	includible  in	his  taxable
turnover. It  is this  view of the High Court which has been
challenged before us by counsel for the appellant-assessee.
     The canon	of construction to be invoked in these types
of  statutes  has  been	 repeatedly  enunciated	 in  several
decisions of  this Court but it is not necessary to refer to
all  of	  them.	 In   Indo   international   Industries	  v.
Commissioner of	 Sales Tax,  Uttar Pradesh  [1981] 3  S.C.R.
294, this court ruled thus:
	  "It is  well-settled that in interpreting items in
	  statutes like	 the Excise  Tax Acts  or Sales	 Tax
	  Acts, whose primary object is to raise revenue and
	  for which  purpose they classify diverse products,
	  articles and	substances resort  should be had not
	  to the  scientific and  technical meaning  of	 the
	  terms or  expressions used  but to  their  popular
	  meaning, that	 is to	say, the meaning attached to
	  them by  those dealing  in them.  If any  term  or
	  expression has  been defined in the enactment then
	  it must  be understood in the sense in which it is
	  defined but in the absence of any definition being
	  given in  the enactment the meaning of the term in
	  common parlance  or commercial  parlance has to be
	  adopted."
     If regard	be had	to this	 rule of  construction,	 the
question  raised  will	have  to  be  answered	against	 the
appellant. On the first aspect of the question it can not be
disputed that  a coconut would be a 'fruit' in the botanical
sense but  unless it  can be  said to  be a 'fresh fruit' it
will not fall within the exemption notification. Similarly a
coconut may  be available  in a vegetable market but because
of that	 it does  not become a 'vegetable'. It is well-known
that the  kernel of  the coconut is used as an ingredient in
the culinary  preparations for	adding taste to the food but
it is  hardly used  as a  substantial article of food on the
table. The  concerned articles	namely, 'fresh	fruits'	 and
'vegetables' being  household articles	of everyday  use for
the table  these will  have to be construed in their popular
sense meaning  the sense  in which  every  householder	will
understand them.  Viewed from  this angle, the most apposite
test would be the one adopted in the case of His Majesty the
King v.	 Planters Nut  and Chocolate  Company Limited [1951]
C.L.R. (Ex.)
343
122  (which   decision	was   approved	by   this  court  in
Commissioner of	 Sales Tax  v. Jaswant	Singh Charan  Singh)
[1967] 2  S.C.R. 720.  Would a	house holder  when asked  to
bring home  some 'fresh	 fruit' and some 'vegetable' for the
evening meal  bring coconut? Obviously, the answer is in the
negative.
     Counsel for  the appellant	 sought	 to  rely  upon	 the
legislative  history   by  referring  some  of	the  earlier
exemption notifications issued by the State Government under
the earlier  Madras General  Sales Tax	Act, 1939 which were
operative till the Tamilnadu General Sales Tax Act, 1959 was
passed but  in our  view such reliance is of no avail to the
appellant.  In	 the   first   place   all   these   earlier
notifications clearly  show that  coconut was always subject
to sales  tax till  G.O. No.  1764 dated 5.4.1960 was issued
under the 1959 Act and there is no material to show that the
Government had	changed its  view and  exempted coconut from
taxation under	the 1959  Act. Secondly,  under the  earlier
notifications merely 'fruits' had been exempted from levy of
sales tax  and since  coconut would  have  come	 within	 the
category of  fruits the	 same as expressly excluded from the
exemption thereby making the sale thereof liable to tax. The
legislative history,  therefore, is  of no assistance to the
appellant. Similarly,  how coconut  was dealt with under the
amendment introduced  by the  Tamil Nadu  Act 2	 of 1970  by
which coconut  was brought under single point taxation would
be immaterial.
     In view  of what  is stated above we feel that the High
Court was right in its conclusion that the appellant's sales
turnover in  coconut was  not exempt  from the	levy of	 the
sales tax.  The appeals	 are, therefore,  dismissed with  no
order as to costs.
     SABYASACHI	 MUKHARJI,  J.	Under  G.O.  No	 1764  dated
5.4.1960,  as	amended	 on  22.12.1960,  issued  under	 the
Tamilnadu General  Sales Tax  Act, 1959,  'fresh fruit'	 and
'vegetable' are	 exempt from  the levy of sales tax. Whether
ripened coconut with or without husk can be considered to be
'vegetable' is the question in these appeals.
     I	respectfully   agree   with   my   learned   brother
Tulzapurkar J.	that principles	 to be	adopted in  deciding
that question are well-settled i.e. in interpreting items in
statutes whose	primary object	is to  raise revenue and for
which purpose  they classify  diverse products, articles and
substances, resort  should be  had not to the scientific and
technical meaning  of the terms of the expressions used, but
to their popular meaning, that is to
344
say, the  meaning attached to them by those dealing in them.
Fresh fruit' or vegetable' has not been defined in the Act.
     My learned brothers have come to the conclusion that it
cannot be disputed that ripened coconut will not be a 'fresh
fruit' in  terms of  the said  notification, I	respectfully
agree. But  my learned brothers have also found that ripened
coconut cannot	be considered to be 'vegetable', I am not so
sure  on   this	 aspect.  Whether  ripened  coconut  can  be
considered to  be a  'vegetable' or  'fruit' in	 any part of
India will  depend upon the evidence available. Tastes vary,
habits differ  and food served, prepared and consumed at the
tables	in   different	parts  of  the	country	 also  vary.
Therefore, it  is safer	 not to	 rest our  decision  on	 our
subjective ideas,  if  possible.  I,  however,	respectfully
agree with  the conclusion  reached by	my learned  brothers
that the appeals should be dismissed.
     It is  well-settled that  it is  for the  assessee	 who
claims	exemption  to  adduce  evidence	 that  a  particular
article is  an exempted item and if he cannot or if he fails
to do so, then the revenue may proceed on its basis. In such
a situation,  the assessee  should have such an opportunity.
We  cannot   foreclose	such   an  opportunity.	  We  cannot
categorically  say  that  ripened  coconut  could  never  be
considered to  be 'vegetable'. But in this case the assessee
has adduced  no evidence. In the premises, the assessee must
fail and  I respectfully agree with the order proposed by my
learned brothers.
N.V.K.					  Appeals dismissed.
345




