

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
The Commissioner Of Income Tax, ... vs Sri J.H. Gotla, Yadagiri on 29 August, 1985Equivalent citations: 1985 AIR 1698, 1985 SCR  Supl. (2) 711
Author: S Mukharji
Bench: Mukharji, Sabyasachi (J)
           PETITIONER:
THE COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX, BANGALORE

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
SRI J.H. GOTLA, YADAGIRI

DATE OF JUDGMENT29/08/1985

BENCH:
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)
BENCH:
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)
TULZAPURKAR, V.D.
MISRA RANGNATH

CITATION:
 1985 AIR 1698		  1985 SCR  Supl. (2) 711
 1985 SCC  (4) 343	  1985 SCALE  (2)723
 CITATOR INFO :
 D	    1990 SC 270	 (8)
 RF	    1991 SC1806	 (11)


ACT:
     Income Tax Act, 1922 Sections 16(3) and 24(2) (ii).
     Income Tax Act, 1961 Section 64.
     Assessee an  Individual - Running oil mill and carrying
on purchase  and sale  of  groundnut  oil  -  Oil  mill	 and
machinery gifted  away to  wife and  minor children  -	Firm
constituted by	wife and  another person - Assessee entering
into agreement	to render  services to	this firm  -  Losses
incurred by  assessee in his individual business in previous
years -	 Whether set  off can  be cld med against profits in
his business and share income of minor children.
     Statutory Interpretation.
     Taxing Statutes  - Interpretation	of -  Strict literal
construction leading  to absurd	 result -  Duty of  court  -
Construction resulting in equity whether to be preferred.



HEADNOTE:
     The respondent-assessee  was an individual, carrying on
business in  purchase and  sale of  groundnut oil and he was
also  running	an  oil	  mill,	 besides   being  an  abkari
contractor. On	Ist June,  1957 he had gifted away a part of
the  oil  mill	machinery,  to	his  wife  and	three  minor
children. A  firm was constituted by the assessee's wife and
another person	to the profits of which the three minor sons
of the	assessee were  also admitted.  The mill	 premises as
well as	 the machinery	of the	assessee were learned out to
this firm  which carried  on the business of manufacture and
sale of	 groundnut oil.	 The assessee  also entered  into an
agreement with	the firm  under which  certain services were
rendered to  the firm by way of management. The assessee was
entitled to  get commission  at the  stipulated rates on the
purchase of  oil cake  ant sale of decoiled cake made by the
firm. The assessee himself continued to carry on business in
purchase and  sale or  ground-nut cake	and oil	 on a  small
scale, and also as an akbari contractor.
     The assessee had incurred huge losses in his individual
business in  the earlier  years	 which	were  being  carried
forward
712
from year  to year upto the assessment year 1958-59, and the
loss carried  forward from  the assessment  year 1958-59 was
over Rs..  7 lakhs.  The  assesee's  profits  from  his	 own
business from  1959-60 were  about Rs..	 14,000.  The  share
Income of  the assessee's  wife aud  minor children from the
firm for  the	assessment year 1959-60 was over Rs. 24,000.
This income  was include  in the  occupation  of  the  total
income of  the assessee	 under section	16 (3) of the Income
Tax Act,  1922 for the assessment year 1959-60. The assessee
claimed	 set-off  of  the  loss	 carried  forward  from	 the
assessment year	 1958-59  against  the	profit	of  his	 own
business as  also the  share income  of his  wife and  minor
children.
      The  income Tax Officer rejected the claim for set off
insofar as  lt related	to the	share Income of his wife and
minor children	Similar claims	for set off were made in the
assessment years 1960-61 and 1961-62 but were rejected.
       On   the	 appeals  preferred  by	 the  assessee,	 the
Appellate Assistant Commissioner allowed the set off claimed
on the	ground that  the assessee  him self  is deemed to be
carrying on  the business  from which  the share  income was
derived by his wife and nor children.
      The  revenue appealed  to	 the  Income  Tax  Appellate
Tribunal, which	 held that  although the  assessee  was	 not
carrying on  the business  of manufacture  and sale  of	 oil
during the years under appeal, he was continuing to carry on
the business  of oil in general, that the firm. and carry on
the same  business as was hitherto belong carried out by the
assessee but  there was	 no connection	between the assessee
and the	 business carried  on by  the firm and they were too
different entities  and, as  much, the assessee could not be
said to	 be carrying  on the business out of which the share
income of  the wife and minor children arose. It accordingly
held that  the assessee	 was not  entitled under  section 24
(2a) of	 the Income  Tax Act  1922 to  claim set  off of his
losses against the income of his wife and minor children.
      The  High Court  on a  reference by  the Tribunal held
that for  an assessee  to be  entitled to  carry forward the
loss to	 the following	year ant  to claim  a set  off under
section 24  (2) (ii)  of the  Act the  following  conditions
should be  fulfilled: (i)  the 1088  must be  In a business;
(ii) the  business, profession or location in which the loss
was originally	must continued	to  be	carried	 on  by	 the
assessee in  the year  In which	 the carried forward loss is
bought to be set of; and (iii) the
713
business, profession  or vocation  against  the	 profits  of
which set  off 18  claimed not be carried on by the assessee
In that	 year, and  relying on the decision of the Karnataka
High Court  In Dr. P. Kapadia v. Commissioner of Income Tax,
87 I.T.R.  511, held  that the	share Income of the assessee
total Income  under section  16(3)  of	the  Act  should  be
regarded as business Income derived from business carried on
by the	assessee, and  the assessee  was entitled to set off
his loss carried forward from the previous year.
      In  the appeals  by the  Revenue to this Court, it WAS
contended relying  on the  decision of the Gujrat High Court
in Dayalbhai  Madhavji Vadera v. Commissioner of Income Tax.
Gujrat 60  I.T.R. 551 that the loss could not be Included In
the total  income of  the assessee  while on  behalf of	 the
assessee   was contended  that in  the first  year when	 the
assets are transferred to the wife or the minor children the
loss has  to be	 taken into  account 18 computing the profit
and gains  arising out of the under of assets 80 transferred
in order  to compute  the result,  ant that  the  object  of
section 16  (3) (a)  was to  foil an Individual's attempt to
reduce the  incidence of  tax by  transferring his assets to
his wife  or minor  child or  by admitting  his	 wife  as  8
partner or his minor child to the benefits of partnership In
a firm	In which  he 18 a partner by transferring the assets
directly or  indirectly to  them otherwise than for adequate
consideration.
      Dismissing the Appeals,
^
     HELD: 1.  The  share  income  of  the  wife  ant  minor
children included in the assesses total income under section
16(3) of  the Act  should be  regarded as  business-  income
derived from  business carried	on by  the assesses, ant the
assesses is  entitled to  set off  his 1088  carried forward
from the previous years. [734 C]
     2. where section 16(3) of the Act operates, the profits
or loss	 from a business of the wife or minor child included
In the total income of the assesses should be treated as the
profit or  loss from  a 'business carried on by him' for the
purpose of  carrying forward ant set off under section 24(2)
of the Act. [733 H-734 A]
     3. (i)  Where the	plain literal  interpretation  of  a
statutory provision produces a manifesty unjust result which
could never have been intended by the legislature, the court
might modify  the language  used by the legislature so as to
achieve the  intention of  the	legislature  and  produce  a
rational
714
construction. The  task of  interpretation  of	a  statutory
provision A  is an  attempt to discover the intention of the
Legislature from  the language	used.  It  is  necessary  to
remember that  language is  at best  an imperfect instrument
for the expression of human intention- [732 G-733 A]
     (ii) Statutes  always have	 some purpose  of object  to
accomplish ant sympathetic ant imaginative discovery of that
purpose in the surest guide to their meaning. [733 B]
      4. The Income Tax Act, 1922 was replaced by the Income
Tax Act, 1961. Section 64 of the Income Tax Act, 1961, deals
with inclusion	of income of the assessee arising out of the
assets transferred  directly or	 indirectly to the spouse or
the minor  child. The  provisions on significant aspects are
similar to  the Act  except that  in section 64 of 1961 Act,
the expression	'spouse' has been used unlike 'wife' used in
section 16(3)  of the  Act. Sections  70 to  72 of  1961 Act
contain provisions  similar  to	 section  24  of  1922	Act.
Subsection (1)	of  section  24,  provides  that  there	 any
asessee substains  a loss  of profits  or gains	 In any year
under any  of the  heads mentioned In section 6, he shall be
entitled to  have the amount of the loss set off against his
income, profits	 or gains under any other head In that year.
[723 D-E]
      5.  Section 4  of the  Wealth Tax Act, 1957 which also
makes assets  transferred to  the wife	or the	minor  child
includible In  the net	wealth of  the	asssessee  were	 the
expression "  in computing  the net wealth of an individual,
there shall  be included,  as belonging	 to that  individual
Then the  different items  including  the  items  of  assets
transferred have  been mentioned.  The Income  Tax Act	only
takes these  as includible  as such while the Wealth Tax Act
makes includible as belonging to the assessee. [724 E]
      6.  To  set  off	the  carried  forward  loss  of	 the
assessee, two conditions were required to be fulfilled under
section 24(2)  of 1922 Act, firstly, business, profession or
vocation must  be  carried  on	by  him	 in  that  year	 and
secondly, that	the business profession or vocation in which
loss was originally sustained must continue to be carried on
by the assessee in the year in question. [724 A-B]
      7.  The principle	 underlying section 24(2)(11) of the
Act was	 to restrict the set off only to the business lncome
of the year to which lt was carried forward 80 that the 1088
sustained by  the assessee in any other business, profession
or vocation  could be  set off	against the  lncome from any
business, professional or vocation carried on by him in that
year. [725 D]
715
      8.  The object  of section  16(3) has  to be  read  in
conjunction  with   section  24(2)-  If	 the  purpose  of  a
particular provision  is   easily discernible from the whole
scheme of the Act which in this case is, to counter-act, the
effect of  the transfer	 of assets  so far as computation of
income of  the assessee	 is  concerned,	 then  bearing	that
purpose in  mind, the intention should be found out from the
language used  by the  legislature  and	 if  strict  literal
construction leads  to an  absurd  result  i.e.	 result	 not
intended to  be subserved  by the object of the legislation,
then if	 other construction  is possible  apart from  strict
literal	 construction	then  that  construction  should  be
preferred to  the strict literal construction. Though equity
and taxation  are often	 strangers, attempts  should be made
that these  do not  remain so  always, and if a construction
results in  equity  rather  than  in  in-justice  then	such
construction   should	 be   preferred	  to   the   literal
construction. [733 C-D]
      9.  It can be accepted without doubt that income would
include 1088.  If it  were a  question of  inclusion of	 the
income of  the wife  or minor child to whom assets have been
transferred by	the assessee  and with	which  business	 was
carried on or by which income was derived by the wife or the
minor child,  then in  including that  income either  of the
wife or	 minor	child	such income  should be	computed  in
accordance with	 section 10  and other provisions of the Act
including section  24(1) and  section 24 (2) of the Act. But
the  question  that  arises  here  is  whether	against	 the
inclusion of such income, loss suffered by the assessee in a
previous year which was carried forward under section 24 (1)
of the Act 8  child be allowed to be set off or not. [731 E-
F]
     Commissioner of  Income Tax  Madras-I v. A.L. Srinivsan
108 I.T.R. 667 distinguished.
      Commissioner  of Income  was, Bombay v. Manilal Dhanji
44 I.T.R. 876, Commissioner of Income Tax, Kerala II v. Smt.
Mary Ignatius  141 I.T.R.  954, Commossioner  of Income Tax,
Kerala	v.   P.K.  Kochammi  Amma  Peroke  125	I.T.R.	624,
Commissioner of	 Income Tax  v.	 S.A.S.	 Marimuthu  Ndar  44
I.T.R. 1, Desh Bandhu Gupta and Co. and others v.Delhi Stock
Exchange Association   Ltd. [1979] 4 S.C.C. 565 and Manickam
and Co.	 v. The	 State of  Tamil Nadu  39 S.T.C.  12  at  18
referred.



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION : Civil Appeals Nos. 1596-
1598 (NT) of 1973.
716
     Appeals under  section 66A (2) of the Indian Income Tax
Act, 1922 from the Judgment and Order dated 21st March, 1973
of the	Mysore High  Court at Bangalore in I.T.R.C. Nos. 33,
34 and 35 of 1970
      S.C.  Manchanda, B.B. Ahuja and Miss A. Subhashini for
the appellant.
     J.	 Ramachandran	and  Mrs.  J.  Ramachandra  for	 the
Respondent.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     SABYASACHI MUKHARJI, J. These appeals arise out of the
 orders	 of the	 High Court  of Karnataka dated 10th August,
1973 for  the assessment]  year 1959-60, 1960-61 and 1961-52
by certificate	granted by  the	 High  Court  under  Section
66A(2) of  the Indian  Income  Tax  Act,  1922,	 hereinafter
referred to as the 'Act'.
      The  assessee is	an individual.	He was	carrying  on
business in  the relevant  assessment years  in purchase and
sale of	 ground-nut oil and was also running an oil mill. He
was also  an abkari  contractor. On  1st June,	1957, he had
gifted away  a part  of the  oil  mill	machinery,  viz.,  a
solvent extraction  plant,  to	his  wife  and	three  minor
children. A  firm was constituted by the assessee's wife and
another person	to the profits of which the three minor sons
of the	assessee were  also admitted.  The mill	 premises as
well as	 the remaining machinery cf the assesses were leased
out to	this firm  which carried  on  the  business  of	 the
manufacture and	 sale of  ground-nut oil.  The assessee	 had
also entered  into an  agreement with  the firm	 under which
certain services  were	rendered  to  the  firm	 by  way  of
management. The	 assessee was  entitled to get commission at
the stipulated rates
 on  the purchase of oil cake and sale of decoiled cake made
by the	firm. The  assessee himself  continued to  carry  on
business in  purchase and sale of ground-nut cake and oil on
a small	 scale. The  assessee also continued his business as
abkari contractor.
       The   assessee  had   incurred  huge  losses  in	 his
individual business  in the  earlier years  which were being
carried forward	 from year  to year upto the assessment year
1958-59. The  1088 carried  forward from the assessment year
1958-59 was Rs. 7,88,734. The assessee's profit from his own
business for 1959-60 were Rs 14,324. The share income of the
assessee's wife	 and minor  children from  the firm  for the
assessment year	 1959-60 was Rs. 24,592. The said income was
included in the computation
717
of the	total income  of the assessee under Section 16(3) of
the Act	 for  the  assessment  year  1959-60.  The  assessee
claimed set  off  of  the  loss	 carried  forward  from	 the
assessment year	 1958-59 against  the  profits	of  his	 own
business as  also the  share income  of his  wife and  minor
children. The  Income tax Officer rejected the claim for set
off in	so far as it related to the share income of his wife
and minor  children. Similar claims for set off were made in
the assessment years 1960-61 and 1961-62 but were rejected.
     On the appeals preferred by the assessee, the Appellate
Assistant Commissioner	allowed the  set off  claimed on the
ground that the assessee himself is deemed to be carrying on
the business  from which the share income was derived by his
wife and  minor children. The revenue appealed to the Income
Tax Appellate  Tribunal, Hyderabad  Bench. The Tribunal held
that although  the assessee was not carrying on the business
of manufacture	and sale  of  oil  during  the	years  under
appeal, he was continuing to carry on the business of oil in
general; that the firm did carry on the same business as has
hitherto carried  on  by  the  assessee	 but  there  was  no
connection between  the assessee and the business carried on
by the	firm and  they were  two different  entities and, as
such, the  assessee could  not be said to be carrying on the
business out of which the share income of the wife and minor
children arose.	 Accordingly it	 held that  the assessee was
not entitled  under Section  24 (2)  of the Act to claim set
off of	his losses  against the income of his wife and minor
children.
     The following  question of law was referred to the High
Court:
	  "Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of
	  the case,  an assessee  would be entitled to carry
	  forward and  set off	the losses against the share
	  income of  the assessee's  wife and minor children
	  in respect  of the  assessment year  1959-60 under
	  Section 24(2) of the Income Tax Act, 1922?
      The  same consequences  followed	for  the  assessment
years  1960-61	 and  1961-62.	For  all  these	 years,	 the
references under  section 66(1)	 of the Act were made to the
High Court.
      The  High Court  after setting out the facts mentioned
hereinbefore referred  to Section 24(2)(ii) of the Act as it
stood in the relevant year.
718
      It  appears from	the section,  as the  High Court has
held, that  for an  assessee to be entitled to carry forward
the loss  to the  following year  and to  claim set off, the
following conditions had to be fulfilled:
	  (1) The loss must be in a business;
	  (2) the  business, profession or vocation in which
	  the  loss   was  originally	sustained  must	  be
	  continued to	be carried on by the assessee in the
	  year in  which the  carried forward loss is sought
	  to be set off; and
	  (3) the  business, profession	 or vocation against
	  the profit  of which	set off	 is claimed  must be
	  carried on by the assessee in that year.
      There is no dispute that the loss was from business in
this case.  The business  in which  the loss  was originally
sustained  was	continued  to  be  carried  forward  by	 the
assessee in  the year  in which the carried forward loss was
sought to  be set off and this aspect was found in favour of
the assessee  by the  Tribunal. The only ground on which the
Tribunal has  denied the  right to  set	 off  was  that	 the
assessee could	not be	said to	 be carrying on the business
out of which the share income of his wife and minor children
was derived.
      The  High Court  noted that the Tribunal had based its
decision on  the Gujarat  High Court  decision in  Dayalbhai
Madhavji Wadera	 v. Commissioner  of Income-Tax, Gujarat 60.
I.T.R. 551,  but a different view was taken by the Karnataka
High Court  in the  case of Dr. T.P. Kapadia v. Commissioner
of Income Tax, Mysore 87 I.T.R. 511. F
      Relying  on the said decision in Kapadia's case and on
a consideration	 of the scheme of the Act and the provisions
there in referred to, the High Court was of the opinion that
the share  income of  the assessee 6 wife and minor children
included in  the assessee's total income under Section 16(3)
of the	said Act  should  be  regarded	as  business  income
derived from business carried on by the assessee and in that
view of	 the matter the assessee was entitled to set off his
loss carried  forward from  the previous  year. Accordingly,
the question  referred to  in respect  of  these  years	 was
answered in the affirmative and in favour of the assessee by
the High Court.
719
      The revenue has come up in these appeals.
      Before  the several  contentions are dealt with, it is
necessary to  bear in  mind that  here what was sought to be
set off	 was the  loss	suffered  by  the  assessee  in	 his
business carried  forward from the previous year against the
income which  was included  in view  of	 the  provisions  of
Section 16  (3) of the Act, the relevant provisions of which
are as follows:-
	  "16. Exemptions and exclusions ill determining the
	  total income-
	  (3)  In   computing  the   total  income   of	 any
	  individual for  the purpose  of assessment,  there
	  shall be included
	  (a) So much of the income of a wife or minor child
	  of  such   individual	 as   arises   directly	  or
	  indirectly -
	  (i) from  the membership  of the wife in a firm of
	  which her husband is a partner;
	  (ii) from  the  admission  of	 the  minor  to	 the
	  benefits of  partnership in  a firm  of which such
	  individual is a partner;
	  (iii)	 from	assets	 transferred   directly	  or
	  indirectly to	 the wife  by the  husband otherwise
	  than for  adequate consideration  or in connection
	  with an agreement to live apart;
	  (iv)	 from	assets	 transferred   directly	  or
	  indirectly to the minor child, not being a married
	  daughter, by	such individual	 otherwise than	 for
	  adequate consideration."
 Section  10 of the Act provides for the computation of
income and states, inter-alia, that the tax shall be payable
by  an	assessee  under	 the  head  "profits  and  gains  of
business, profession  or vocation" in respect of the profits
or gains  of any business, profession or vocation carried on
by him and sub-section (2) indicates what are the allowances
that are  allowable in	making such  computation. It  is not
necessary for  the present purposes to set out in detail the
said provision.
      The  relevant provision  of sub-section (1) of Section
24 so  far as  Is material  for the  purpose of	 the present
case, was as follows:
720
	  "Where any  assessee sustains a loss of profits or
	  gains in any year under any of the heads mentioned
	  in section  6, he  shall be  entitled to  have the
	  amount of  the loss  set off	against his  income,
	  profits or  gains under  any other  head  in	that
	  year.
      It  is not  necessary to refer to the provisions which
deal with  speculative losses  and the exceptions indicating
the speculative losses.
      The  relevant provisions of sub-section (2) of Section
24 which are material for the present purpose are:
	  "Where any  assessee sustains a loss of profits or
	  gains in  any year,  being  a	 previous  year	 not
	  earlier than	the previous year for the assessment
	  for the  year ending	on the	31st day  of  March,
	  1940, in any business, profession or vocation, and
	  the loss  cannot be  wholly  set  off	 under	sub-
	  section (1),	so much of the loss as is not so set
	  off or  the whole  loss where	 the assessee had no
	  other head  of income	 shall be carried forward to
	  the following year, and
	  (i)where the	loss  was  sustained  by  him  in  a
	  business consisting  of speculative  transactions,
	  it shall  be set  off only against the profits and
	  gains, if  any, of  any  business  in	 speculative
	  transactions carried on by him in that year:
	  (ii) Where  the loss	was sustained  by him in any
	  other business,  profession or  vocation, it shall
	  be set  off against the profits and gains, if any,
	  of any business, profession or vocation carried on
	  by him  in that  year: provided that the business,
	  profession or	 vocation  in  which  the  loss	 was
	  originally sustained continued to be carried on by
	  him in that year; and
	  (iii) if the loss in either case cannot' be wholly
	  so set  off, the  amount of  loss not	 so set	 off
	  shall be carried forward to the following year and
	  so on	 but no loss shall be so carried forward for
	  more than eight years:"
      Reliance	was placed  on behalf  of the revenue on the
decision of  the Gujarat High Court in the case of Dayalbhai
Kadhavji  Vadbra  v.  Commissioner  of	Income-Tax,  Gujarat
(supra). In that
721
in decision,  the division  bench of  the Gujarat High Court
observed  that where the share of the wife or minor child in
a firm	in which the assessee was a partner was a loss, such
loss could  not be  included in	 the  total  income  of	 the
assessee. The  term 'income'  the Gujarat  High Court noted,
had not	 been defined  in Section  16 (3)  of the  said Act.
Though 'income'	 might in  certain  cases  include  negative
income	namely,	 loss,	but  such  a  construction  was	 not
favoured according  to the Gujarat High Court, by Section 16
(3) of	the Act. The Gujarat High Court was of the view that
the section  created an artificial liability. The expression
'includes' in  clause (a)  of sub-clause  (iii) prima facie,
carried the  concept  of  adding  rather  than	subtracting,
deducting or setting off. Section 16 (3) provided, according
to the	Gujarat High Court, only for inclusions in the total
income of an individual and did not create any legal fiction
whereby the income of another was deemed to be the income of
the individual.	 Therefore 1086 arising under any one of the
sub-clause of  Section 16  (3) (a)  could  not	be  set	 off
against income	falling under  the other  or the rest of the
sub-clauses. If	 such a	 set-off were  to be  made, it would
result in  a benefit  to the  father or	 the husband  of the
individual. Such  a construction  would be  contrary to	 the
provisions of  Section 24 of the Act under which it would be
the person  to whose  share the	 loss fell,  who  alone	 was
entitled to a set-off.
     In	 that  case  two  contentions  were  urged  for	 the
assessee before	 the High Court: (1) that the term income as
used in	 Section 16  (3) (a)  would  also  include  negative
income i.e.,  loss, and	 (2) that while ascertaining what is
to be  included in  the total  income of  an assessee  under
Section 16  (3) (a),  the Income-Tax Officer had to take the
totality of  all the  income under  the four  sub-clauses of
clause (a)  of Section	16 (3)	and arrive at the net result
and it	was such  net result  that had to be included in the
total income of the assessee. His contention, therefore, was
that if	 there was  income under  one head  but	 loss  under
another, covered  by any  of the  four sub-clauses of clause
(a) of	Section 16  (3) such  1088 had to be set off against
the Income  or the profits or gains acruing or arising under
another head and it would be the resulting balance which had
to be  added to	 the total income of the assessee. He argued
that, while computing the total income of the assessee, when
the Income-Tax	Officer sought to include therein the income
of the	assessee's wife	 or the	 minor	child  arising	from
membership of the wife in the firm in which the assessee was
a partner  or from  the admission  of the  minor son  to the
benefits of partnership in that
722
firm and  the income  arising from the assets transferred to
the wife  and the minor son, the Income-tax Officer must, in
computing such	income of  the wife  and the  son, take into
consideration the 1088, if any, that had come to their share
in the business of that firm or from the transferred assets,
and then  add only  the balance,  if any.  The question that
fell   for   consideration    before	the   Gujarat	High
Court	 as   whether	this   could	be     accepted	  as
a true	and proper construction of Section 16(3) of the act.
The High  Court noted  that the	 section obviously  aimed at
preventing an  attempt on  the part of the assessee to avoid
or reduce  the incidence  of tax  either by transferring his
assets to  his wife  or minor child or by admitting his wife
or minor child to the benefits of partnership in which he is
a partner.
     The scheme	 of clause (a) in sub-section (3) was not to
set off 1088, according to the High Court, arising under any
one of the sub-clauses against income arising from the other
or the	rest of	 the sub-clauses  Such a thing perhaps might
have  been   possible  if,  instead  of	 providing  for	 the
inclusion of  income of	 wife or  minor child  in the  total
income of  an assessee, such income had, by a legal fiction,
been made  the income  or the share of the assessee himself.
The High Court noted that  had not been done. The High Court
was of	the opinion that while enacting sub-section (3), the
legislature had	 before it  the deeming	 fiction in  Section
16(1)(c). Sub-section 1 (c) of Section 16 of the Arbitration
dealt with  the income	arising to any person by virtue of a
settlement or  disposition whether  revocable  or  not,	 and
whether effected.before	 or after  the commencement  of	 the
Income-tax (Amendment)	Act, 1939, from assets remaining the
property of  the settlor  or disponer, would be teemed to be
income of the settlor or disponer, and all income arising to
any person  by virtue  of a  revocable	tran8fer  of  assets
shoult be  deemed to  be income of the transferor. Here this
unlike clause  (c) of sub-section (1) and sub-section (3) of
Section 16, provides for inclusion of certain income for the
purpose of  assessment in  deeming such	 income	 to  be	 the
income of  the assessee.  The High  Court  referred  to	 the
decision of  the Privy	Council in  the case  of Lawless  v.
Sullivan 1881 6 App. Cas.373.
     On behalf	of the	revenue,  stress  was  laid  on	 the
decision of  the Gujarat High Court, but as would be evident
from the  facts narrated  before, the  facts of	 the instant
case are  materially different.	 The present  case is  not a
case where the wife or the child to whom the assets had been
transferred had	 suffered any  1088 in	a Year subsequent to
the year of transfer. Here is a case
723
where the  husband has suffered loss in a year subsequent to
the  transfer of certain assets, income arising out of which
is sought  to be  included in  the  assessee's	income.	 The
question here  is in  including such  an income	 whether the
loss suffered  by the  assessee in his own business could be
set off.  Learned counsel  for the revenue stressed that the
Legislature has	 not, in  Section 16(3) of the Act, used the
expression 'deemed to be the income' in contradistinction to
the same  expression used  in Section  16(1) (c) of the Act.
But in	judging the controversy of the present case, whether
the income  is deemed  to be or actually included would not,
perhaps, in  the facts	and circumstances  of the case, make
any material difference. What has to be found out is what is
is be included.
 Income-tax Act,  1922 was	replaced by  Income-tax Act,
1961. Section  64 of  the Income-tax Act, 1961, (hereinafter
referred to as '1961 Act') deals with inclusion of income of
the assessee  arising out of the assets transferred directly
or  indirecty	to  the	 spouse	 or  the  minor	 child.	 The
provisions  of	 significant  aspects  are  similar  to	 the
provisions of  Section 16(3)  of  the  Act  except  that  in
Section 64  of 1961  Act, the  expression 'spouse'  has been
used unlike 'wife' used in Section 16(3) of the Act.
 Section 70 to 72 of 1961 Act contain provisions similar
to Section  24 of the Act. Sub-section (1) of Section 24, as
noticed, provides that where any assessee sustains a loss of
earns profits  or gains	 in any	 year under any of the heads
mentioned in  Section 6,  he shall  be entitled	 to have the
amount of  the loss  set off  against his income, profits or
gains under any other head in that year.
     Counsel for  the assessee contended, and in our opinion
rightly,  that	in  the	 first	year  when  the	 assets	 are
transferred to the wife or the minor child then the loss has
to be  taken into account in computing the profits and gains
arising out of the user of assets so transferred in order to
compute the  result. This,  in our  opinion,  is  the  plain
meaning of the section. The difficulty, however, arises in a
case where  loss is  sustained by  an assessee	in any other
business, profession  or vocation  in a	 succeeding year. In
such a	case loss so sustained by him in any other business,
profession or  vocation can  be carried	 forward and set off
against the  profits or	 gains, if  any,  of  any  business,
profession or  vocation carried	 on  by	 him  in  that	year
(emphasis suppled);  provided the  business,  profession  or
vocation  in   which  the   loss  was  originally  sustained
continued to be carried on by
724
him in	that year. Therefore, to set off the carried forward
loss of	 the assessee,	two conditions	were required  to be
fulfilled under	 Section 24(2)	of  the	 Act,  firstly,	 the
business, profession  or vocation  must be carried on by him
in that	 year and secondly, that the business, profession or
vocation  in   which  loss  was	 originally  sustained	must
continue to  be carried	 on (emphasis added) by the assessee
in the year in question. The High Court has noted that there
are three  conditions: (1)  the	 loss  must  be	 loss  in  a
business; (2)  the business, profession or vocation in which
the loss  was originally  sustained must  be continued to be
carried on  by the assesses in the year in which the carried
forward loss is sought to be set off; and (3) the business,
 profession or vocation against the profits of which set off
is claimed must have been carried on by the assesses in that
year. That the loss is from business is not disputed in this
case. From  the facts  noted before, it is also evident that
the business  in which the loss was originally sustained was
continued to  be carried  on by	 the assesses in the year in
which the  carried forward loss is sought to be set off. But
the question  is was  the assesses  carrying on the business
from which  the share  income of his wife and minor children
was derived?  This is  also a condition which is required to
be fulfilled.
     In Section	 4 of Wealth Tax Act, 1957, which also makes
assets transferred to the wife or the minor child includible
in the	net wealth  of the  assesses uses  the expression in
computing the  net wealth  of an  individual, there shall be
included,  as	belonging  to	that  individual   (emphasis
supplied). Then	 the different	items including the items of
assets transferred  have been  mentioned. The Income-tax Act
only makes  these as includible as such while the Wealth-Tax
Act makes  these includible as belonging to the assessee. It
is not	necessary to examine whether in view of Section 2(m)
of the	Wealth-Tax Act	read with  Section 3 of the said Act
which  is   the	 charging  section,  such  a  provision	 was
necessary unlike  Section 10  and Section  2(6C)  read	with
Section 3 of the said Act.
     Reliance was  placed on  behalf of	 the revenue  on the
decision  of   the  Madras   High  Court   in  the  case  of
Commissioner of Income-tax, Madras-I v. A.A.. Srinivasan 108
I.T.R. 667. The assessee in that case had claimed set off of
the losses carried forward by him from prior  years  in	 his
individual assessment  against the  share income of his wife
from a	partnership firm  in which he was also a partner and
which was  included in	his assessment	by reason of Section
16(3)(a). The Tribunal held that the
725
business carried  on by	 the firm  could  be  treated  as  a
business   carried on  by the  husband though the wife was a
partner in  the said firm and hence the carried forward loss
was  allowable	against	 her  share  income  from  the	firm
included in the husband's income. In those circumstances, it
was held  that in  the context	of Section  24(Z)(ii) of the
Act, it was difficult to hold that the business in that case
was wholly  carried on	by the	husband assessee or that the
income wholly belonged to him and, hence, on the language of
Section 16S3)  read with Section 24, the Tribunal's view was
not justified.
     There the	Division Bench of the Madras High Court held
that the language of Section 16(3)(a) of the Act showed that
the income  earned by the wife retained its character as her
income and  was not converted into the income of the husband
for all	 purposes. The	inclusion of  the income of the wife
was only  for the  purpose of  taxing it in the hands of the
husband. But  the identity of the income of the wife was not
lost. The  principle underlying Section 24(2)(ii) of the Act
was to	restrict the  set-off only to the business income of
the year  to which  it was  carried forward so that the loss
sustained by  the assessee in any other business, profession
or vocation  could be  set off	against the  income from any
business, profession  or vocation  carried on by him in that
year. Though,  for certain purposes, the business carried on
by the	firm is	 treated as  the business  carried on by the
partner,  still	 for  applying	section	 24(1)	the  statute
required that  the income  against  which the  set  off	 was
claimed should	belong to  the assessee and this requirement
was not	 excluded by  Section 24(2).  Facts of the case were
also different 'in as much as the husband was not a  partner
in the firm in the present case.
     Several propositions were canvassed before us on behalf
of the	assessee the  main one	being that  the court should
consider  the	purpose	 of   the  section  for	 the  proper
construction of	 the relevant  provisions of  the Act. It is
manifest, as  contended for  on behalf of the assessee, that
the object  of Section	16(3)(a) was to foil an individual's
attempt to  reduce the	incidence of tax by transferring his
assets to  his wife  or minor child or by admitting his wife
as  a  partner	or  his	 minor	child  to  the	benefits  or
partnership  in	 a  firm  in  which  he	 was  a	 partner  by
transferring the  assets  directly  or	indirectly  to	them
otherwise than for adequate consideration.
     This Court	 in the	 case of  Commissioner of incom-tax,
Bombay V- Manilal Dhanji 44 I.T.R. 876, dealing with Section
16 of the Act observed at page 881 of the report thus:
726
	  "The object of the legislation is clearly designed
	  to overtake  and circumvent a tendency on the part
	  of the  taxpayers to	endeavour to avoid or reduce
	  tax liability by means of settlements. Sub-section
	  (2) deals  with grossing  up of dividend etc. Then
	  we come  to sub-section (3). This sub-section aims
	  at foiling  an individual's  attempt to  avoid  or
	  reduce the  incidence of  tax by  transferring his
	  assets to his wife or minor child or admitting his
	  wife as  a partner or admitting his minor child or
	  admitting his	 wife as  a partner or admitting his
	  minor child  to the benefits of a partnership in a
	  firm in  which such  individual is  a partner. The
	  sub-section creates an artificial liability to tax
	  and must be strictly construed."
     Attention was drawn in this connection to a circular of
the Board of Revenue - C.B.R. Circular No. 20 of 1944, which
reads thus:
	  "C.B.R.  Circular   No.20  of	  1944.	 C.No.4(13)-
	  I.T./44, dated the 15th July, 1944.
	  Subject: Section  16(3)(a) - Loss incurred by wife
	  of minor  child -  Right of  set off under section
	  24(1) and (2).
	  Attention is	invited to the Board's Circular No.-
	  35 of 1941, on the above subject. It was laid down
	  therein what	where the  wife or minor child of an
	  individual incurs  a loss  which if it were income
	  would	 Le   includible  in   the  income  of	that
	  individual under  section 16(3),  such loss should
	  be set off only against the income, if any, of the
	  wife or  minor child	and if	not wholly  set	 off
	  should  be   carried	forward,   subject  to	 the
	  provisions  of   section  24(2).   The  Board	 has
	  reconsidered the  question and  has decided  that,
	  although this	 view may  be tenable  in  law,	 the
	  other and  ¯ re-equitable view is at least equally
	  tenable that	such loss should be treated as if it
	  were a  loss sustained by that individual. Thus if
	  the wife  or minor  child has a personal income of
	  Rs.  5,000   wich  is	  not  includible   in	 the
	  individual's	income	 and  sustains	 a  loss  of
	  Rs.10,000 from  a source the lncome of which would
	  be includible in the income of the individual, the
	  loss should be set off against the
727
	  income of  the individual under section 24(1), and
	  if   not wholly  set off should be carried forward
	  under section	 24(2). The  wife or the minor child
	  would, therefore,  be assessable  on the  personal
	  income of  Rs.5,000. If  in any  case the  wife or
	  minor child  claims a	 set-off of the loss against
	  the persona1	income, lt  should be brought to the
	  notice of  the Board.	 Board's Circular  No. 35 of
	  1941 is hereby cancelled.
     It was further submitted that the circular of the Board
of Revenue  would be  binding on  all the officers. Reliance
was placed  on the  observations of  this Court in Navnitlal
Javeri v.  K.K. Sen,  Appellate	 Assistant  Commissioner  of
Income Tax  Bombay 56  I.T.R. 198  at page 203. It was urged
that though the circular was not binding on the assessee, it
was binding  on the  revenue. In  our opinion,	it  was	 not
necessary for  the purpose  of disposing of these appeals to
refer to  this aspect  at all.	These appeals do not involve
the question of set off of 1088 sustained by the wife or the
minor children	of the	assessee and  brought forward by the
wife or	 minor children	 to  be	 set  off  from	 the  income
included from  the  partnership	 firm  carried	with  assets
transferred by	an assessee  to his  wife or  minor children
subsequent to  the year of transfer. Therefore, the question
whether computation  of lncome	involves deduction  of	106s
from gross  profits, is	 not relevant. The question 1nvolved
in this case is, whether the income of the wife and/or minor
children of  the assessee  from a  partnership firm in which
the wife  is a	partner	 and/or	 minor	children  have	been
admitted to  the benefits of partnership carried on with the
assets transferred by the assessee in any year subsequent to
the year  of transfer  could be	 set off  against  any	loss
brought forward	 by the	 assessee in  respect of  a business
carried on  by	the  assessee.	In  the	 instant  case,	 the
business of  the firm  in which	 assessee wife	and  to	 the
benefits of which his m nor children had been admitted was a
firm in	 which the assessee himself was not a partner and as
such that business was not being carried on by the assessee.
Counsel for  the assessee  contended that the real object of
Section 16(3)  of the  said Act	 was to restore the position
which obtained	before the  transfer, qua  income. In  other
words, he urged that it was as if the transfer had not taken
place. It  was his  submission that  if the transfer had not
taken place,  the income  of the wife and the minor children
from the  assets transferred  viz., machinery  in this case,
would be  the income  of the  assessee. In  other words,  it
would be  income from  his  business  if  the  transfer	 was
lgnored. In
728
that case  loss from  business could  be carried forward for
six to eight years as the case may be, to be set off against
the business  income of the assessee. Counsel urged that the
object of  the said  section was  not to punish the assessee
for having  trans ferred  his assets  to his  wife or  minor
children by  denying any  allowance, concession,  deduction,
etc. to	 which he  or others would otherwise be entitled to.
There is substance in this contention. In order, however, to
obtain set  off of carried for ward loss, two conditions had
to be  fulfilled. When the circular dated 15th July, 1944 as
mentioned before,  was issued,	the present problem involved
in these  appeals was  not dealt  with. When  1961  Act	 was
enacted, this  was also	 not clarified.	 The requirement  of
Section 72  which replaced Section 24(2) of the Act proceeds
substantially on previous basis.
     In view  of the  facts and circumstances of the present
case, it  is also  not necessary  to deal in detail with the
Kerala High  Court decision  in the  case of Commissioner of
Income- Tax,  Kerala II v. Smt Mary Ignatius 141 I.T.R. 954.
Though the  inclusion of  the income of one in the income of
another arose  in that	case under Section 16 of the Act and
Section 64(1)(ii)  of 1961  Act, the question that falls for
consideration  in   the	 present   case	 did  not  fall	 for
consideration in that case.
     Dealing  with   the  Madras   High	 Court	judgment  in
Commissioner of	 Income-Tax,  Madras-I	v.  A.L.  Srinivasan
(supra), Poti, Acting CJ observed at page 960 thus:
	  "Section 24(2)(ii)  allowed a	 set-off of the loss
	  sustained by	a person in any business against the
	  gains of  any business  carried on  by him  during
	  that year.  For the  purpose of  the	section,  it
	  cannot be  said that the income that he derived as
	  a partner from the firm, which was doing business,
	  was not  income rim  business carried on by him in
	  that year.  The question that the court had really
	  to deal  with was  whether the  wife's income	 was
	  part of  the husband's  income. If  it was part of
	  his income it could be set off against the loss of
	  that year  whatever be  the head  under which	 the
	  losses are incurred.
     It would  be necessary,  however, to examine whether in
view of	 the facts  of this  case and  in the  light of	 the
requirement of	Section 24(2) of the Act, whether the losses
suffered by  the husband in the previous year can be carried
forward and set off
729
against the  income of	the  wife  and	the  minor  children
included in   the  income of  the assessee - income which is
earned from a firm in which the assessee was not a partner.
     The  Madhya   Pradesh  High   Court  in   the  case  of
Comnissioner of	 Income-Tax, M.P-I  v. Badri  Prasad Agarwal
142 I.T.R.  353 held  that the	addition of Explanation 2 to
Section	 64  of	 1961  Act  with  effect  from	1980  was  a
parliamentary exposition  of the  true position	 in law that
was obtaining  earlier to  the effect that income in Section
16(3) would  include loss.  The Court further reiterated the
position that  if two views are possible, then the one which
is favourable to the assessee should be adopted. 'Income' in
Section 64  of the  Act of  1961 includes  loss. Furthermore
Explanation 2  added by	 Finance Act,  1979 to Section 64 in
specific terms	says that  'income' would  include loss. But
that Explanation  even on  the assumption  that	 this  is  a
parliamentary exposition  of the existing position would not
solve the present problem.
     The Bombay	 High Court  in the case of R.M. Goculdas V.
Commissioner of	 Income-Tax, Bombay  151 I.T.R.	 67, had  to
consider this  aspect. CBR's  Circular No.  20 in  which the
Board had  taken the  view that	 where the wife or the minor
child of  an individual	 incurred a  loss which	 if it	were
income would  be includible in the income of that individual
under Section  16(3) of	 the Income-tax Act, 1922, such loss
should be  set off against the income of the individual, was
withdrawn on  6th April,  1972. Subsequently,  Section 64 of
the 1961  Act was  amended by  the Finance  Act,  1979	with
effect from  1st April,	 1980 by  insertion of Explanation 2
after sub-section  (2), whereby	 for  the  purpose  of	this
section, income	 would include loss. The Explanation must be
regarded, according  to the  Bombay  High  Court,  as  being
clari- ficatory	 in nature  as reflecting  the correct legal
position both  under Section  16 of  the Act  as also  under
Section 64  of the  1961 Act  and the proper approach to the
specified  provisions	for  aggregation  or  clubbing.	 The
Explanation added  to Section  64(2) must  be regarded	as a
parliamentary  exposition,  according  to  the	Bombay	High
Court, of  the meaning	of the word 'income-' as used in the
unamended section.  Even without  the said  Explanation, for
the purpose  of clubbing,  income or  profits would  include
negative income	 or negative  profits, that  is, loss  also.
Therefore, even	 during the period between the withdrawal of
the Circular  in 1972  and the	amendment of Section 64 with
effect from  1st April,	 1980, the loss incurred by the wife
or  minor   child  was	includible  in	the  income  of	 the
individual. Hence, the loss apportioned to the
730
wife in	 a firm	 in which  her husband was also a partner in
includible in  determining the	husband's  total  income  or
total loss.
     On behalf	of the	assessee, it  was contended that the
only purpose of the loss incurred by the wife or minor child
being included	in the	total income  of the assessee was to
enable the  assessee to	 have a	 set off under Section 24(1)
and Section  24(2). There  is good  deal of substance in the
view. Looked  at from  one point  of view  it is possible to
accept the position that would be the effect, i.e. to enable
the assessee  to have  a set  off under Section 24(2) of the
Act. This  inclusion of	 the loss  sustained by	 the wife or
minor children	in the	total income of the assessee is to a
certain extent	as effective  as deeming  the income  of the
wife or	 minor child to be the assessee's Income. In view of
the definition of 'total income', argued counsel, in Section
2 (15)	the income  has to  be processed  under the relevant
section (e.g.  Section 10  in  the  case  of  business)	 and
deductions, allowances	and exemptions	are to be granted as
if that	 income was  also part	of the	total income  of the
assessee etc. i.e. to be treated in the same way.
     This Court	 in  the  case	of  C.I.T.  Kerala  v.	P.K.
Kochammu Amma  Peroke 125  I.T.R. 624, in the context of the
obligation of  submission of  the  return  and	Penalty	 for
failure to include the income of the wife or the minor child
in the	return, has  held that	the words  "his	 income"  in
Section 139  of the 1961 Act and Section 271 (1) (c) of 1961
Act  would  include  such  income  to  be  included  in	 the
assessee's total income.
     This Court has also held that the assessee was entitled
to earned  income relief  in relation  to such	income - see
Commissioner of	 Income Tax  v. S.A.S.	Marimuthu  Nadar  44
I.T.R. 1. In other words, the income was in no way different
from  assessee's   income  for	the  purpose  of  this	Act.
Therefore, the	provisions of  Section 16(3) of the Act have
the same  effect as the words 'deemed to be' used in Section
16(1)(c). Since	 both income  as well as loss of the wife or
minor child,  argued counsel  for tlle	assessee, has  to be
included in  the assessee's  total  income  and	 are  to  be
treated as  the assessee's income or loss ior the purpose of
the Act,  the effect  was that	there was  comp1ete identity
between	 the   assessee	 and  the  minor  child	 as  regards
assessee's income  and such  income to	be included  in	 his
total income.
731
     Counsel stressed  on the  inequitable result  of strict
literal	 interpretation of treating the business of the wife
or minor  child as being one not carried on by the assessee.
He  posed  before  us  by  way	of  illustration  where	 the
assessee's income  in one year is small - say Rs. 10,000 the
business 108s  of the  wife or minor child to be lncluded in
his income  ln that  year is  large -  say Ks. 1 lakh, there
results a  loss for  Rs. 90,000 which can- not be dealt with
in the assessment of the wife or minor child. If in the next
year, the business of the wife or minor child yields a large
profit -  say Rs.  1 lakh,  the entire	profit of  Rs.1 lakh
would become  assessable in  the hands	of the assessee, but
the unabsorbed	loss of	 the earlier  year (Rs.90,000) would
not be	allowed to  be set  off,  if  on  a  strict  literal
interpretation, the  business of  the wife or minor child is
treated as  one not  carried on by the assessee. The wife or
minor child  also would	 he denied the set off as the income
has to be included in the assessee's income. This results in
an inequitable	position which	could not have been intended
by the Parliament, i.e. to counteract the object of transfer
only and  not to  punish the  assesses or  to deny  him	 any
allowance  or	deduction  which  the  assessee	 would	have
otherwise been entitled to.
     The question  in the  instant case	 is within  a  short
compass. It  can be  accepted without much doubt that income
would include  loss. If	 it were  a question of inclusion of
the income  of the  wife or  minor child to whom assets have
been transferred by the assessee and with which the business
was carried on or by which income was derived by the wife or
he minor  child, then in including that income either of the
wife or	 nor  child.  such  income  should  be	computed  in
accordance with	 Section 10  and other provisions of the Act
i.e. including	Section 24(1)  and Section 24(2) of the Act.
But the	 question that	arises here  is whether	 against the
inclusion of such income, loss suffered by the assessee in a
previous year  which was carried forward under Section 24(1)
of the	Act should  be allowed	to be  set off	or not.	 The
revenue contends  that it cannot be. It lays emphasis on the
fact that  set off for the carried forward loss is permitted
only by	 Section 24(1) of the Act and there should be strict
literal construction of Section 24(2) and as such in view of
the provisions	of Section  24(2)(ii) which  stipulates that
loss to be carried forward must be 'loss sustained by him in
any other  business, profession or vocation, it shall be set
off against  the profits and gains, if any, of any business,
profession or  vocation carried	 on by	him  in	 that  year;
provided that  the business, profession or vocation in which
the loss was originally
732
sustained continued  to be  carried on by him in that year'.
Therefore, it  is required  that the business, profession or
vocation against  profits of  which the	 set off  is claimed
must be	 carried on  by the  assessee in  that year. But the
problem here  is that the business out of whose share income
of the	wife or	 minor child is derived is no longer carried
on by  the assessee  himself in the subsequent year in which
set off	 is being  claimed. On	behalf of the revenue it was
emphasised that this requirement is to be strictly followed.
Revenue	  emphasised	that   the   requirement   continues
irrespective of the clarification of the Board of Revenue by
Circular in 1944 and in spite of the addition of Explanation
2 to  Section 64(2) by Amending Act of 1979 with effect from
1980. Therefore, it was urged that legislative intent
 was clear and it was not possible to hold otherwise.
     On the  other hand	 on behalf  of the  assessee it	 was
contended that	it would often result in extreme anomaly and
hardship, for instance in the example noticed before. It was
further stressed on behalf of the revenue that equity has no
place in interpreting fiscal legislation.
     We need  not, for	the purpose  of	 the  instant  case,
express any  opinion whether  circulars in  the instant case
should be  construed as	 contemporaneous exposition  of	 the
Legislative intent.  The question was discussed exhaustively
in the	case of	 Desh Bandhu  Gupta and	 Co. and  Others. v.
Delhi Stock Exchange Association Ltd. [1979] 4 S.C.C. 565.
     Our attention  was also  drawn to	the decision  in the
case of	 Manickam and  Co. v.  The State  of Tamil  Nadu  39
S.T.C. 12 at page 18 as well as Craies on Statute Law (Sixth
Ed.) page 147.
     In the  case of  K.P. Verghese  v. Income-Tax  Officer,
Ernakulam and  Another 131 I.T.R. 597, this Court emphasised
that  a	  statutory  provision	must  be  so  construed,  if
possible, that absurdity and mischief may be avoided.
     Where the	plain literal  interpretation of a statutory
Provision   produces a	manifestly unjust result which could
never have been intended by the legislature, the Court might
¯ modify  the language	used by	 the legislature  so  as  to
achieve the  intention of  the	legislature  and  produce  a
rational construction.	The  task  of  interpretation  of  a
statutory provision  is an attempt to discover the intention
of the	Legislature from  the language used. It is necessary
to remember that language is at best an imperfect
733
instrument for the expression of human intention. It is well
to A remember the warning administered by judge Learned Hand
that one  should not  make fortress  out of  dictionary	 but
remember that statutes always have some purpose or object to
accomplish and	sympathetic and imaginative discovery is the
surest guide to their meaning.
     We have  noted the	 object of  Section 16(3) of the Act
which has  to be  read in  conjunction with Section 24(2) in
this case  for the  present purpose.  In the  purpose  of  a
particular provision  is easily	 discernible from  the whole
scheme of  the Act which in this case is, to counteract, the
effect of  the transfer	 of assets  so far as computation of
income of  the	assessee  is  concerned	 then  bearing	that
purpose in  mind, we  should find out the intention from the
language used  by the  Legislature  and	 if  strict  literal
construction leads  to an  absurd  result  i.e.	 result	 not
intended to  be subserved  by the  object of the legislation
found out  in the  manner indicated  before, and  if another
construction  is   possible  apart   from   strict   literal
construction then  that consturction  should be preferred to
the strict  literal construction. Though equity and taxation
are often  strangers, attempts	should be made that these do
not remain always so and if a construction results in equity
rather than  in in-justice, then such construction should be
preferred to  the literal  construction. Furthermore, in the
instant case  we are  dealing with  an artificial  liability
created for counteracting the effect only of attempts by the
assessee to  reduce tax	 liability by  transfer. It has also
been noted  how for various pruposes the business from which
profit is  included or loss is set off is treated in various
situations as  assessee's income.  The scheme  of the Act as
worked out has been noted before.
     In view of the aforesaid and in view of the attitude of
the law-makers	in dealing with this problem as evidenced by
the amendment  and in  the circular  originally issued prior
thereto and bearing in mind that under the scheme of the Act
where the wife or minor child carries on a running business,
the right  to carry forward the 109s in the running business
would be  available to	the wife  or  minor  child  if	they
themselves were	 assessed but  the right would be completely
lost if	 the individual in whose total income the loss is to
be included is not permitted to carry forward the loss under
Section 24(2j  since that  would be the result of the strict
literal construction it is apparent that that could not have
been the intent of the Parliament. Therefore,  where Section
16(3) of the Act operates, the profits or 1oss from
734
a business  of the wife or minor child included in the total
income of  the assessee	 should be  treated as the profit or
loss from  a 'business carried on by him' for the purpose of
carrying forward  and set  off such loss under Section 24(2)
of the Act.
     On a  consideration of  the scheme	 of the	 Act and the
provisions therein  as noted before, the share income of the
wife and  minor children  included in  the assessee's  total
income under  Section 16(3) of the Act should be regarded as
business income	 derived from  business carried	 on  by	 the
assessee and  in that  view of	the matter,, the assessee is
entitled to  set off  his  loss	 carried  forward  from	 the
previous years.
     In the  premises the  question must  be answered in the
affirmative and	 in favour  of	the  assessee.	The  appeals
accordingly  fail  and	are  dismissed.	 In  the  facts	 and
circumstances of  the case, we make the parties pay and bear
their respective  costs of  these appeals.  C.M.P. No. 97 of
1973 for condonation of delay is allowed.
N.V.K.					  Appeals dismissed.
735




