

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Man Singh And Ors vs State Of Punjab And Ors on 23 August, 1985Equivalent citations: 1985 AIR 1737, 1985 SCR  Supl. (2) 662
Author: R Pathak
Bench: Pathak, R.S.
           PETITIONER:
MAN SINGH AND ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF PUNJAB AND ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT23/08/1985

BENCH:
PATHAK, R.S.
BENCH:
PATHAK, R.S.
TULZAPURKAR, V.D.
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)

CITATION:
 1985 AIR 1737		  1985 SCR  Supl. (2) 662
 1985 SCC  (4) 146	  1985 SCALE  (2)367
 CITATOR INFO :
 R	    1987 SC 648	 (4,8)


ACT:
     Constitution of India 1950, Articles 14, 19(1)(g) & 21.
     Punjab Cycle  Rickshaws (Regulation  of  licence)	Act,
1976 Sections 3 & 5.
     Cycle Rickshaw  - Licence	- Grant	 of -  Vehicle to be
plied by owner himself - Whether - Valid - Constitutional.
     Statutory Interpretation.
     Validity of  statute - Determination of - Duty of court
Consider the  degree of	 encroachment of  citizen's right  -
Reasonableness	 can	be   determined	   on	 surrounding
circumstances and contemporaneous legislation.



HEADNOTE:
     The  Petitioners	in  the	  Writ	Petition  ply  cycle
rickshaws which	 they hire  for the  day from  the owners of
those vehicles.	 They carry on that activity for about eight
months in  the year  and then  return to the region to which
they belong.  Por the  hire of	cycle rickshaws they pay the
owners a  certain sum  for the	day retaining the balance of
the day's  income to  themselves. They are not in a position
to purchase  any  cycle	 rickshaws.  Unless  they  hire	 the
vehicles they  cannot carry  on that  activity. Oppressed by
poverty this  arrangement of  cycle rickshaw  hire has	been
resorted to  with the  owners who  through such exploitation
obtain an  unduly handsome  return on  the paltry investment
made in the purchase of the cycle rickshaws.
     The  Punjab  Legislature,	enacted	 the  Punjab'  Cycle
Rickshaws(Regulation of	 Licence) Act, 1976 and 8. 3 thereof
provided that  no owner of a cycle rickshaw shall be granted
any licence in respect of his cycle rickshaw nor his licence
shall be  renewed  by  any  municipal  authority  after	 the
commencement of	 the Act, unless the cycle-rickshaw is to be
plied by such owner himself. Sec. 5
663
of the Act provided for penal punishment of any person found
to A  be in possession of a cycle-rickshaw without a licence
conforming to the provisions of the Act.
     The  constitutional   validity  of	  the  Punjab  Cycle
Rickshaw (Regulation  of Licence)  Act, 1976  was challenged
and this  Court In  M/S Azad Rickshaw Pullers Union v. State
of Punjab, [1981] 1 S.C.R. 366, framed the following scheme:
     (a)  Every	  rickshaw  puller   in	 Amritsar  or  other
municipality who  had been  a licence within one year of the
coming into  force of  the Act shall be entitled to apply to
the  Municipal	Commissioner  for  a  certificate  or  other
document to  the effect	 that he  had  been  a	licence	 for
rickshaw pulling.
     (b) The  Municipal Commissioner will verify the records
and will  grant the  necessary certificate or other document
within one month from the date of the application.
     (c)  On   receipt	of  the	 Municipal  certificate	 the
rickshaw  puller   will	 apply	 to  the   Credit  Guarantee
Corporation of	India  (Small  Loans)  under  the  Guarantee
scheme of 1971 for advance of a loan upto Rs. 900.
     (d) The  loan amount  shall be  repaid by	the rickshaw
puller in  15 monthly  instalments.  If	 there	are  delayed
payments of  instalments of  loan, higher  rate of  interest
will be recoverable.
     (e) When  the rickshaw  pullers during the agricultural
season go to work in their fields, they shall nominate other
rickshaw pullers  without employment  to ply  the  rickshaws
during that season. The Municipal Commissioner, if satisfied
that the  nomination made is bona fide will issue licence to
such pullers,  or nominees of the licensed rickshaw pullers,
in the agricultural season.
     The petitioners  in their Writ Petitions contended that
the 1976  enactment resulted in making their conditions much
worse, for  whereas formerly  they could  at least  ply	 the
cycle rickshaws	 on hiring  them from  the owners for a sum,
they were  unable to  do so  now, especially as they did not
have the funds, nor possessed the arrangements for obtaining
a loan	for the	 purpose, and  as they	were  not  permanent
residents of  Amritsar, no  one was prepared to stand sure q
for the	 amount they sought to borrow from the Banks. It was
further contended that this scheme of this
664
Court in M/S Azad Rickshaw Puller's Union v. State of Punjab
had  not   been	 implemented   by  the	 Amritsar  Municipal
Corporation and	 consequently the  provisions of  the Punjab
Act of	1976 had  continued to operate with unbated severity
to their  detriment, and  that it be declared ultra vires as
an unconstitutional violation of the fundamental right under
sub.cl.(g) of  cl.(l) of  Article 19  of the Constitution to
carry on  occupation or	 business. As a	 similar restriction
is not	imposed on  taxi drivers,  cart load carriers, three
wheeler auto  rickshaw drivers and other vehicles plying for
public hire  the Punjab	 Act violates the fundamental rights
guaranteed by  Articles 14  and 16  of the Constitution, The
scheme propounded  by  the  Court  has	failed	because	 the
Municipal Administration  did not  make any  real attempt to
implement it.
     The Writ  Petitions  were	contested  by  the  Amritsar
municipal Corporation.	It was	contended that the cost of a
cycle rickshaw being about Rs.1200 a person with substantial
financial  resources   would  purchase	a  number  of  cycle
rickshaws and hire them out to rickshaw pullers at Rs. 8 per
day irrespective  of  the  income  earned  by  the  rickshaw
puller, thus  earning over  150 per  cent interest  over his
investment. To	protect poor and needy rickshaw pullers from
such exploitation, the Legislature enacted the Punjab Act of
1976 to	 enable rickshaw  pullers to  escape the clutches of
middlemen. Between the enforcement of the Punjab Act and the
formulation of	the scheme  in Azad  Rickshaw Puller's Union
the Corporation	 renewed more than nine thousand licences in
favour of individual rickshaw pullers who were owners of the
rickshaws plied	 by them.  No limit  on the  number of cycle
rickshaws to  be plied	had been  imposed by  the  Municipal
Corporation.
     On the  question: (l) Whether the Punjab Act of 1976 is
an instance  of incomplete  legislation and cannot serve the
purpose for  which  it	Was  intended  and  because  of	 the
prohibitions  and   restraints	incorporated   in   it,	  it
constitutes an	unreasonable restriction  on the fundamental
rights guaranteed  under sub-cl.(g)  of cl.(l) of Art. 19 of
the constitution and also violates Articles 14 and 16 of the
Constitution. (2) Whether the scheme framed by this Court in
Azad  Rickshaw	 Puller's  Union   is  incapable  of  proper
implementation, and therefore of no legal effect.
     Dismissing the Writ Petitions,
^
     HELD: 1.  (a) The Punjab Cycle Rickshaws (Regulation of
Licence) Act  1976 cannot  be regarded	as  an	unreasonable
restriction on	the fundamental	 rights of  the	 petitioners
under Art.  21 read with sub-cl.(g) of clause (1) of Article
19 of the Constitution. [680 A]
665
     (b) The  Punjab Cycle Rickshaws (Regulation of Licence)
Act A  of 1976 regulates the issue of licenses in respect of
cycle rickshaws plying in any Municipal area in the State of
Punjab. It  essentially provides  that no  owner of  a cycle
rickshaw will  be granted  a license in respect of his cycle
rickshaw unless	 the vehicle  is plied by the owner himself.
The intention  of the  statute is  to ensure  the plying  of
cycle rickshaws	 by rickshaw  pullers who  are owners of the
vehicle thus eliminating the middleman who owns the vehicle.
[675 E]
     (c) The  true test of the validity of a statute must be
the  effect   and  consequence	 of  its  operation  on	 the
fundamental right  of the citizen. The object underlying the
legislation  embodies  the  intent  of	the  legislature  in
enacting it,  but in  construing its validity in the context
of a  citizen's fundamental  right the	question before	 the
Court always  must be  whether its impact on the fundamental
right can  be regarded	as a  reasonable restriction  on the
exercise  of   the  right.   The  focal	 point	during	such
examination is	the fundamental	 right, and  the duty of the
Court must  be to  consider the	 quality and  degree of	 the
encroachment made  by the  operation of	 the statute  on the
citizen's exercise of that right. [676 D-E]
     Maneka Gandhi  v. Union  of India, [1978] 2 S.C.R. 621,
R.C. Cooper  v. Union of India, [1970] 3 S.C.R.53C, referred
to.
     In the instant case, 8. 3 of the Punjab Act of 1976 has
the effect  of making it possible for the rickshaw puller to
ply the	 rickshaw as  owner of the vehicle and thereby to be
the full  owner of  the income earned by him. No longer will
he be  obliged to  pare with  an appreciable portion of that
income in favour of another who owns the vehicle. The Punjab
Act is	a beneficial  legislation bringing  directly home to
the rickshaw  puller the entire fruit of his daily toil. The
enactment is  intended as  a social  welfare measure against
the exploitation  of the  poor and  unemployed by  rapacious
cycle rickshaw	owners	who  by	 reason	 of  their  superior
financial resources  fatten their  wealth from	the  sweated
toil of	 rickshaw pullers.  The	 legislation  constitutes  a
reasonable restriction	on the right of such rickshaw owners
to carry  on the  business  of	hiring	out  cycle  rickshaw
inasmuch as  the  exercise  of	the  right  ld	excluded  by
legislation designed  for the economic and social welfare of
rickshaw pullers, who constitute a significant sector of the
people, a sector 80 pressed by poverty and straitened by the
economic misery of their situation that the
666
guarantee of  their full  day's wages  to them	seems  amply
justified. [676 F-677 B]
     2.(a) The	scheme framed by this Court in Azad Rickshaw
Pullers Union  is a  good scheme, capable of implementation,
and productive	of the	objective for which it was designed.
If it has not been successfully implemented so far, it is in
the main  largely on  account of  circumstances which  could
have been  avoided. Inherently	there is  no feature  in the
scheme which  operates against	its  effectiveness.  If	 the
scheme has not succeeded as was intended by the Court, it is
largely because	 appropriate action  was not  taken  by	 the
parties concerned to implement it. [680 D]
     (b) It  is permissible to judge the reasonableness of a
law on the basis of the surrounding circumstances as well as
of contemporaneous  legislation enacted	 as part of a single
scheme. [678 D]
     The Lord  Krishna Sugar  Mills Ltd. & Anr. v. The Union
of India & Anr. [1960] 1 S.C.R. 39, referred to.
     (c) The  Punjab Act  confers on the State Government by
8. 7, power to frame appropriate rules in support of and for
the furtherance	 of the	 object of  the Act. In the event of
the scheme  being altered  or modified	by its	authors to a
degree incompatible  with the  true operation and success of
the Punjab Act, the situation can always be met by the State
Government framing  suitable rules under 8 7 of the Act. The
State Government is not only empowered to do so; it is under
an obligation  to frame	 rules appropriate to the successful
implementation of the legislative goal. [679 F]
     (d) The  Municipal	 Corporation  should  determine	 the
maximum number	of licenses  which  should  be	granted	 for
plying cycle  rickshaws	 within	 its  jurisdictions  limits,
keeping in  mind the  needs of	the travelling public on the
one hand  and the  danger of uneconomic plying on the other.
Every rickshaw	puller proposing  to take  advantage of	 the
scheme should  apply to	 the Municipal	Commissioner  for  a
certificate, the  period within	 which such applications may
be filed  being certified  by the Municipal Corporation from
time to	 time. All  the applications will be consider ed, in
the serial  order in  which they are received, for the grant
of certificate on the basis of which the rickshaw puller may
take further  steps envisaged in the scheme for the grant of
financial
667
assistance enabling  him to  purchase a	 cycle rickshaw	 for
plying A  by him.  The issue  of the  certificate  shall  be
subject to the following conditions: [680 H-681 B]
     1. Each  certificate shall be granted in respect of one
cycle rickshaw only. [681 C]
     2. The  number of	certificates issued shall / t exceed
the maximum,  if any,  fixed by the Municipal Corporation as
the total  strength of	the cycle  rickshaws allowed  to ply
within its jurisdictional limits. [681 D]
     3. No  person shall  be  granted  more  than  one	such
certificate. [681 E]
     4. Preference  shall be given in the matter of granting
certificates to those rickshaw pullers who had plied a cycle
rickshaw for one year before the Punjab Act came into force.
[681 E] D



JUDGMENT:
     ORIGINAL JURISDICTION  :  Writ  Petition  (Civil)	Nos.
57286308 of 1982.
     (Under Article 32 of the Constitution of India)
     V.M. Tarkunde and S.M. Ashri for the Petitioners.
     Naunit Lal and S.K. Bagga for the Respondents.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     PATHAK, J.	 The petitioners in these writ petitions ply
cycle rickshaws in Amritsar which they hire for the day from
the owners of those vehicles. Most of the petitioners belong
to  other  districts  of  Punjab  and  also  come  from	 the
neighbouring States  of Jammu  and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh
and Uttar  Pradesh. They  carry on  that activity  for about
eight months  in the  year and then return to the regions to
which they  belong. They  observe this	practice year  after
year. For  the hire of cycle rickshaws they pay the owners a
certain sum  for the day, retaining the balance of the day's
income to  themselves. It is alleged by the petitioners that
they are  not in  a position to purchase any cycle rickshaws
and that  unless they hire the vehicles they cannot carry on
that activity.
     Over the years there has been considerable agitation in
the State  of Punjab  against the  practice of the owners of
cycle
668
rickshaws hiring people of the poorest stratum in society to
ply the	 cycle rickshaws for public passenger traffic and to
charge them  for each  day's use of the vehicles. It is said
that oppressed	by their  poverty the  petitioners and those
similarly placed  are obliged to enter into this arrangement
with cycle  rickshaw owners,  who through  such exploitation
are able quite often to obtain, an unduly handsome return on
the paltry  investment made  in the  purchase of  the  cycle
rickshaws.  The	  agitation  led  the  State  Government  to
consider  measures   for  enabling   the  pullers  of  cycle
rickshaws to  extricate themselves  from such  exploitation,
and it was thought desirable that the cycle rickshaw pullers
should own  their own  vehicles, and  the  State  Government
should arrange	interest free  loans for them to enable them
to purchase  cycle rickshaws.  With this object in mind, the
Punjab	Legislature   enacted  the  Punjab  Cycle  Rickshaws
(Regulation of Licence) Act. 1976.
     S. 3 provided:
	  Licence for  cycle-rickshaws.- (1) Notwithstanding
	  anything contained  to the  contrary in the Punjab
	  Municipal Act,  1911, or any rule or order or bye-
	  law made  thereunder or any other law for the time
	  being in force, no owner of a cycle-rickshaw shall
	  be granted  any licence  in respect  of his cycle-
	  rickshaw nor	his licence  shall be renewed by any
	  municipal authority after the commencement of this
	  Act unless  the cycle-rickshaw  is to	 be plied by
	  such owner himself.'
And s. 5 declared:-
	  "Penalties.- (1) Any person who is found to be, in
	  possession of	 a cycle-rickshaw  without a licence
	  conforming to	 the provisions of this Act or plies
	  or causes  it to  be plied  by a  person without a
	  valid driver's  licence issued  under any  law for
	  the time  being in  force or plies or causes to be
	  plied a  cycle-rickshaw not  meant to be plied for
	  hire without	painting the  body thereof in yellow
	  shall be  punishable with  imprisonment which	 may
	  extend to three months.
     The  petitioners  considered  that	 the  enactment	 had
resulted in  making their  conditions much worse for whereas
formerly they  could at	 least ply  the	 cycle-rickshaws  or
hiring them from the
669
owners for  a sum,  they were unable to do so now, specially
as  they   did	not   have  the	 funds,	 nor  possessed	 the
arrangements for  obtaining a  loan for	 the purpose. It was
pointed out  that as  the  petitioners	were  not  permanent
residents of  Amritsar, no  one was prepared to stand surety
for the	 amount which  they sought to borrow form the Banks,
that inasmuch  as the  Banks at	 Amritsar had been unable to
recover about  eighty per  cent of the amount loaned by them
they had  decided to  deny this	 facility to  cycle-rickshaw
pullers, and that, therefore, they were not in a position to
purchase cycle-rickshaw.  In the  circumstances, a number of
cycle rickshaw	pullers filed Civil Writ Petition No. 563 of
1979 Nanak  Chand &  Ors. v. State of Punjab & Ors. and Writ
Petition No. 839 of 1979 Azad Rickshaw Pullers Union (Regd.)
Ch. Town Hall, Amritsar & Ors. v. The State of Punjab & Ors.
[1981] 1 SCR 366.
     Meanwhile,	 and   to  the	 same  end,   the  Municipal
Corporation of Delhi had amended the Cycle-rickshaw Bye-laws
of 1960. After amendment, bye-law 3 read as follows:-
	  "3 (1)  No person  shall keep	 or ply	 for hire  a
	  cycle rickshaw  in Delhi  unless he himself is the
	  owner thereof	 and holds a licence granted in that
	  behalf by  the Commissioner  on payment of the fee
	  that may,  from time	to time, be fixed under sub-
	  section (2) of section 430 provided that no person
	  shall be granted more than one such licence-
	  (2) No  person shall	drive a	 cycle rickshaw	 for
	  hire unless  he holds a driving licence granted in
	  that behalf  by the Commissioner on payment of the
	  fee that  may, from  time to	time be	 fixed under
	  sub-section (2) of Section 430.
The bye-laws  framed by the Delhi Municipal Corporation were
challenged by  cycle rickshaw  pullers in  Writ Petition No.
841 of	1980 Nanhu  & Ors.  v. Delhi  Administration &	Ors.
[1981] 1 SCR 373.
     The two  Writ Petitions  Nos. 563 and 839 of 1979 filed
by the	cycle rickshaw	pullers of Amritsar were disposed of
by this	 Court on August 5, 1980 by a judgement in which the
Court  decided	not  to	 enter	into  the  question  of	 the
constitutional validity	 of  the  Punjab  Act  but,  on	 the
contrary, to  frame a  scheme in  furtherance of the Act and
for the purpose of giving effect to it. Likewise
670
on the	same day  this Court disposed of Writ Petitions Nos.
841 of 1980 and 728 of 1980 pertaining to the cycle rickshaw
pullers of  Delhi, and	the judgment  proceeded on  the same
lines as in Amritsar Writ Petitions.
     The scheme	 propounded by	the Court  in Azad  Rickshaw
puller Union  (supra) was  intended to	be  a  self-working,
specific  scheme   which  makes	 the  statutory	 ban  not  a
negative, self-defeating  interdict, but a positive economic
manumission ,  and to  apply to	 the entire State of Punjab.
Its principle features may be set forth here.
     1.	  Every rickshaw  puller who  had been a licensee in
the Amritsar  or other	municipality within  one year of the
coming into  force of  the  Punjab  Act	 of  1976  would  be
entitled to  apply to  the Municipal Commissioner within one
month from  the date  of the judgment (August 5, 1980) for a
certificate testifying that he had
held a	licence for rickshaw pulling within that period. The
Municipal Commissioner	would, after  verification from	 the
records, grant	the certificate within one / nth of the date
of application,	 taking a  liberal attitude in the matter of
issuing the certificate.
     2.	  On receipt  of the  certificate or  other document
the rickshaw  puller could  apply to  the  Credit  Guarantee
Corporation of	India  (Small  Loans)  under  the  Guarantee
Scheme	of   1971,  requesting	 the  Corporation  to  stand
guarantee to  the Punjab  National Bank	 or other.  mutually
agreed upon  schedule bank for advance of a loan upto Rs.900
(or for	 a larger  sum if  the price of a cycle rickshaw was
more than Rs.900).
     3.	  The rickshaw	puller would  deposit a sum of Rs.50
with the  Bank as  a condition	of eligibility for obtaining
the loan, and the balance of the loan would be guaranteed by
the  aforesaid	 Corporation.  Upon   fulfillment  of  those
conditions, the	 Bank would advance the sum required for the
purchase of  a cycle  rickshaw to the manufacturer or vendor
indicated by the rickshaw puller.
     4.	  Upon taking  delivery of  the cycle  rickshaw	 and
producing before  the Bank  the voucher	 evidencing purchase
and  delivery  along  with  the	 rickshaw,  if	needed,	 for
physical  verification	 within	 one  week  of	taking	such
delivery, and  thereafter whenever  directed,  the  rickshaw
puller would execute the necessary documents required by the
Bank in	 order to  hypothecate the  vehicle in favour of the
Bank.
671
     5.	  The rate  of	interest  payable  by  the  rickshaw
puller to  A the Bank would be governed by the Scheme framed
by the State Government for loans to rickshaw pullers.
     6.	  The loan would be repaid by the rickshaw puller in
15 monthly  instalments. If  payment of	 the instalments  is
delay-ed, higher  rates of  interest would be recoverable in
accordance with	 the  1971  scheme.  In	 the  event  of	 the
instalment being  duly paid,  the Government would reimburse
the rickshaw puller with the total amount of interest.
     7.	  Some further	facilities for	the rickshaw pullers
would be  included within  the Scheme.	For example: (1) The
Rickshaw Puller Union would be permitted by the Municipality
to set	up and run a workshop for repair and allied work and
a service  station for the cycle rickshaws. Sufficient place
would be  allowed in suitable places for rickshaw stands and
for the	 safe  keeping	of  rickshaws  subject	to  moderate
charges.  (2)  Where  during  the  agricultural	 season	 and
rickshaw puller	 nominated other  unemployed persons  to ply
the rickshaws during that season the Municipal Commissioner,
on satisfaction	 that the  nomination was  made	 bona  fide,
would issue licences to the nominees for the duration of the
agricultural season.
     8.	  If group  insurance of  the life  of the  rickshaw
pullers and  of their  rickshaws was  feasible the Municipal
Commissioner would  prepare  a	scheme	in  that  behalf  in
consultation with the Rickshaw Puller Unions.
     9.	  Likewise, the	 Municipal Commissioner	 would	also
draw up	 a project whereby cycle rickshaws would be replaced
by scooters  in	 successive  phases  so	 that  the  rickshaw
pullers could ultimately become scooter drivers owning their
own scooters.
     The scheme	 formulated by	the Court  in Nanhu  &	Ors.
(supra) for  the Delhi	Cycle Rickshaw pullers contained the
same  features.	 The  Delhi  Administration  had  imposed  a
ceiling on  the total  number of cycle rickshaws permissible
on the	road within  its   territory, and the Court directed
the  Delhi   Administration  to	  consider  applications  by
rickshaw pullers  for licenses	on their  merits,  including
consideration of  the period during which the applicants had
carried on such activity.
In 1982 the present writ petitions were filed by a number of
rickshaw pullers of Amritsar, who complained that the scheme
672
propounded by  this Court  had not  been implemented  by the
Amrtisar  Municipal   Corporation  and	in  the	 result	 the
provisions of  the Punjab  Act	of  1976  had  continued  to
operate with unabated severity to their detriment. They pray
that  the   Punjab  Act	  be  declared	ultra  vires  as  an
unconstitutional violation  of their fundamental right under
sub-cl. (g)  of cl. (1) of Article 19 of the constitution to
carry on  their occupation  or business.  They also  contend
that as	 a  similar  restriction  is  not  imposed  on	taxi
drivers, cart  load carriers,  three  wheeler  auto-rickshaw
drivers and other vehicles plying for public hire the Punjab
Act violates  the  fundamental	rights	of  the	 petitioners
guaranteed by  Articles 14  and 16  of the  constitution. In
this connection	 they  also  point  out	 that  20,000  cycle
rickshaws are  being allowed  to  ply  in  Ahmedabad,  Agra,
Kanpur, Varanasi,  Patna, Calcutta and Nagpur, cities with a
population not	less than  that	 of  Amritsar,	by  rickshaw
pullers who  do not  own the  vehicles plied  by  them.	 The
petitioners say	 that the Scheme propounded by the court has
failed because the Municipal Administration did not make any
real attempt to implement it.
     In opposing  the writ  petitions the Amritsar Municipal
Corporation affirms that the cost of a cycle rickshaws being
about Rs.1200  a person with substantial financial resources
would purchase a number of cycle rickshaws and hire them out
to rickshaw  pullers at	 Rs.8 per  day irrespective  of	 the
income earned  by the rickshaw puller, thus earning over 150
per cent  interest over	 his investment	 after	taking	into
account expenditure  incurred in  petty repairs.  To protect
poor and  needy rickshaw  pullers from such exploitation the
Punjab Legislature  'had enacted the aforesaid Punjab Act of
1976 to	 enable rickshaw pullers to escape from the clutches
Of such middle-men. lt was asserted that with the Punjab Act
coming into  force a  large number  of rickshaw	 pullers had
taken advantage	 of the	 Act and  purchased their  own cycle
rickshaws under	 the Punjab  Government Scheme	by  securing
loans from  the Banks. It seems that between the enforcement
of the	Punjab Act and the formulation of the scheme by this
Court in  Azad Rickshaw	 Pullers Union	(supra) the Amritsar
Municipal Corporation  had already  renewed more  than	nine
thousand licences  in favour of individual rickshaw pullers,
who were  owners of the rickshaws plied by them. No limit on
the number  of cycle  rickshaws to be plied had been imposed
by the	Municipal Corporation.	According  to  the  Amritsar
Municipal Corporation the individual rickshaw pullers failed
to apply  to the  Municipal Corporation	 for  the  requisite
certificates enabling  them under  the Scheme  to apply to a
schedule Banks for a loan. It
673
transpires, however,  that the	Azad Rickshaw  Pullers Union
deposited  1170	  applications,	 purporting   to   be	from
individual rickshaw  pullers, with  the	 Amritsar  Municipal
Corporation for certificates in accordance with the terms of
the Scheme and this, it was said, was done between the first
week of	 August, 1980 and the first week of September, 1980.
It is alleged by the petitioner that these applications have
remained pending  with the  Municipal Corporation ever since
and no	certificate has	 yet been  issued pursuant to any of
those applications.  The material  on the  record,  however,
discloses  that	  on  September	  16,  1980   the  Municipal
Corporation wrote  to the Azad Rickshaw Pullers Union asking
it to  direct  the  individual	applicants  to	furnish	 the
license numbers	 of the	 previous rickshaw  driving licenses
issued within  one year	 of the	 coming into  force  of	 the
Punjab	Act  of	 1976  in  order  to  enable  the  Municipal
Corporation to	verify from  its records that the respective
applicants were	 entitled to  the certificate. The Municipal
Corporation has	 stated on  affidavit  that  the  names	 and
addresses of  the  applicants  set  forth  in  many  of	 the
applications were  illegible, some  of them  were  not	even
signed or bore the impression of the applicant's thumb mark,
that  some   of	 the  applications  had	 been  submitted  in
duplicate or  triplicate in  order to  obtain more  than one
certificate  for   the	same   applicant,   that   all	 the
applications were  made on  the printed	 form  of  the	Azad
Rickshaw Pullers  Union, and  in the circumstances it became
necessary for the Municipal Corporation to ask that Union to
direct the  applicants to  furnish the	license	 numbers  of
their rickshaw	driving licenses  80 that  the	certificates
could be  issued without  delay. It  is pointed out that the
said Union  wrote back on October 3, 1980 that as it had not
been possible  for the	rickshaw pullers to preserve the old
licenses they could only make a statement that they had been
plying rickshaws  in the  past and the Municipal Corporation
should verify from its records whether the applications were
in order. It is stated that none of the applicants presented
himself	 nor   produced	 any   licenses	 or  License  number
thereafter. The	 Municipal Corporation	wrote on December l,
1980 again  to the  said Union	for the information required
from the applicants 80 that further action could be taken in
the matter.  It is  said that  the thing  was  done  by	 the
applicants or by the said Union and ultimately the Municipal
Corporation, after  waiting for	 a considerable	 time for  a
response from  the applicants,	decided to  attempt to trace
out the	 names of  the applicants  from its old records. The
task, it appears, took a considerable time, and according to
the Municipal  Corporation it  was hampered by the fact that
the names  and addresses  of the applicants were not clearly
legible on the
674
applications  and   in	some   cases  the   addresses	were
incomplete.   The    Municipal	 Corporation   affirm	that
notwithstanding the  lack of cooperation from the applicants
it was	able to	 prepare as  many  as  785  certificates  by
November 22,  1983 and a letter was written by the Municipal
Corporation to	the said  Union	 asking	 the  applicants  to
collect their  certificates. It	 is alleged that none of the
applicants turned up. According to the Municipal Corporation
the applicants are merely pawns in the hands of the previous
owners of  the cycle  rickshaws and are being manipulated by
them.
     It also appears that the Municipal Corporation received
a letter  dated September  1, 1980  from the  Azad  Rickshaw
Pullers Union  for permission  to  use	the  rickshaw  stand
already situate	 at the	 General Bus  Stand, Amritsar  as  a
rickshaw repairing  workshop. There  was  a  further  letter
dated September 17, 1980 from the Azad Rickshaw Puller Union
for allotment of land for rickshaw sheds and rickshaw stands
to enable  the rickshaw	 pullers to  keep their rickshaws in
safe custody  during their  leisure  hours  and	 during	 the
night. The allotment of land was requested in five different
localities of  the city	 80 that  a corresponding  number of
sheds could be raised, the land required for each shed being
10,000 square  meters. On  October  4,	1980  the  Municipal
Corporation replied  that there	 was no	 vacant land  at the
places mentioned  by the  said Union  and that	land at some
other suitable	places may  be suggested.  By a letter dated
December 1, 1980 the Municipal Corporation reminded the said
Union  that   it  should   suggest  alternative	 places	 for
providing sheds	 for  the  rickshaws.  It  is  alleged	that
thereafter there was no reply. There are other affidavits on
the records,  some  of	them  having  been  filed  by  other
rickshaw  puller  Unions  of  Amritsar	alleging  that	some
rickshaw pullers  had already  availed of the benefit of the
Scheme propounded by this Court and were plying rickshaws on
loans taken  from the Banks. Then there are applications for
intervention by	 Rickshaw Pullers  Union belonging  to other
Municipalities in  Punjab which	 suggest that  the Municipal
Committee concerned,  purporting to  act  under	 the  Scheme
propounded by  this Court,  have entered  upon a  course  of
rampant corruption,  granting a	 number of certificates to a
single applicant  behind whom  stand the old rickshaw owners
who are	 thus perverting  the scheme  for their	 own  greedy
ends. In  other words,	the  original  rickshaw	 owners	 are
attempting, through  false applications	 made in the name of
fictitious persons,  to secure certificates enabling them to
put a  number of  vehicles on  the road.  Further affidavits
have been  filed in  support of the writ petition testifying
to  the	  difficulty  in  obtaining  certificates  from	 the
Municipal Corporation and there
675
after loans  from the  Banks and  to  the  impossibility  of
plying Rickshaws  without  proper  arrangements	 for  safely
parking them  for the  night. There  are allegations on both
sides, the  petitioners being  accused of having been set up
by the	original owners of the vehicles in order to have the
Punjab Act of 1976 struck down by the Court and on the other
side   the    Municipal	  Corporation	being	accused	  of
unwillingness to work the Scheme propounded by the Court.
     Two questions arise before us. The first is whether the
Punjab Act  of 1976 is an instance of incomplete legislation
and cannot  serve the  purpose for which it was intended and
in  the	 circumstances,	 because  of  the  prohibitions	 and
restraints   incorporated   in	 it,   it   constitutes	  an
unreasonable restriction  on the  fundamental rights  of the
petitioners guaranteed	under sub-cl.(g) of cl.(l) of Art.19
of the	Constitution and also violates Articles 14 and 16 of
the Constitution.  The second question is whether the scheme
framed by  this Court in Azad Rickshaw Pullers Union (supra)
is incapable  of proper	 implementation, and therefore of no
legal effect.
 The Punjab	 Act of 1976 regulates the issue of licenses
in respect  of cycle  rickshaws plying in any municipal area
in the State of Punjab. It contains very few provisions, and
essentially provides  that no owner of a cycle rickshaw will
be granted a license in respect Of his cycle rickshaw unless
the vehicle  is plied by the owner himself. She intention of
the statute  is to  ensure the	plying of cycle rickshaws by
rickshaw  pullers  who	are  owners  of	 the  vehicle,	thus
eliminating the middlemen who owns the vehicle.
     The petitioners  contend that  8.3 o  the	Punjab	Act
constitutes an unreasonable restriction on their fundamental
right under  sub-cl.(g) of  clause (1)	of Article 19 of the
Constitution to	 carry on  their occupation  of plying cycle
rickshaws because  the exercise	 of that right has been mate
dependent upon	their owning  the cycle	 rickshaws piled  by
them. It  is urged  that the  constitutional validity of the
impugned legislation  cannot be sustained on the basis of an
administrative scheme  which has  not been sanctioned by it,
and there  is nothing in the Punjab Act itself which enables
rickshaw pullers  to acquire  proprietary  rights  in  cycle
rickshaws plied	 by them.  It is urged that while the object
of the	statute has been expressed in 8.3 of the Punjab Act,
there is nothing in the Act which provides the machinery for
achieving that	object. It is not sufficient, it is said, to
provide that
676
the rickshaw  puller should  own the cycle rickshaw which he
plies. The  statute should  have provided the mechanics of a
system which  would have  enabled rickshaw pullers, in their
abject poverty,	 to become  the owners	of such vehicles. No
such provision	having been  made  in  the  statute,  it  is
submitted, the	Act represents	at  best  a  declaration  of
policy and  nothing more.  Our attention has been invited to
the observations  of this Court in Maneka Gandhi v. Union of
India [1978]  2 S.C.R.	621, where  it has  been elaborately
explained that	Article 21  must be  read with Article 19 in
adjudging the  constitutional validity	of an  Act,  and  in
doing so  the consequences  brought about  by  the  impugned
legislation, and of the action under it, on the citizen must
constitute the	test of	 its validity rather than the object
of the Legislature or the form of action. Reference was made
in this	 connection to	the law	 laid down in B.C. Cooper v.
Union of  India [1970]	3 S.C.R.  530, and  other cases.  It
cannot be  disputed, it	 seems to  us, that the true test of
the validity of a statute must be the effect and consequence
of its	operation on  the fundamental  right of the citizen.
The object underlying the legislation embodies the intent of
the Legislature	 in  enacting  it,  but	 in  construing	 its
validity in the context of a citizen's fundamental right the
question before	 the Court always must be whether its impact
on that	 fundamental right  can be  regarded as a reasonable
restriction on	the exercise  of the  right. The focal point
during such  examination is  the fundamental  right, and the
duty of the Court must be to consider the quality and degree
of the	encroachment made by the operation of the statute on
the citizen's exercise of that right.
     In the  instant case,  s.3 of  the Punjab	Act has	 the
effect of  making it possible for the rickshaw puller to ply
the rickshaw  as owner	of the vehicle and thereby to be the
full owner of the income earned by him. No longer will he be
obliged to  part with  an appreciable portion of that income
in favour of another who owns the vehicle. The Punjab Act is
beneficial  legislation	  bringing  directly   home  to	 the
rickshaw puller	 the entire  fruit of  his daily  toil. m  e
enactment is  intended as  a social  welfare measure against
the exploitation  of the  poor and  unemployed by  rapacious
cycle rickshaw	owners	who  by	 reason	 of  their  superior
financial resources  fatten their  wealth from	the  sweated
toil or	 rickshaw pullers.  Even if  we look at the impugned
legislation from  the point  of view  of its  impact of	 the
fundamental right  of rickshaw	owners who give them on hire
to rickshaw  pullers  for  plying,  it	is  plain  that	 the
legislation constitutes	 a  reasonable	restriction  on	 the
right of such rickshaw owners to carry on the
677
business of  hiring out	 cycle	rickshaws  inasmuch  as	 the
exercise A  of the right is excluded by legislation designed
for the economic ant social welfare of rickshaw pullers, who
constitute a  significant sector  of the people, a sector 80
pressed by  poverty and straitened by the economic misery of
their situation that the guarantee of their full day's wages
to them seems amply justified.
     On the question whether the Punjab Act is incomplete in
itself and,  88 it  stands,  has  the  effect  of  disabling
rickshaw pullers  from carrying	 on he	occupation of plying
cycle rickshaws because of the condition of ownership in the
cycle rickshaws,  the Court  is	 entitled  to  consider	 the
factual matrix	in which  the Punjab Act was enacted for the
purpose of  determining its validity. The record of the case
discloses that	for several  years a  powerful movement	 has
raged  aimed   at  freeing   the   rickshaw   pullers	from
exploitation by	 cycle rickshaw owners. The owner is usually
a person  of sufficient	 wealth enabling  him to  acquire  a
number of  cycle rickshaws.  The  rickshaw  puller,  on	 the
contrary, is a needy person, beaten by poverty and compelled
to ply	the rickshaw  on terms	dictated by  the owner,	 who
taking advantage  of the  desperate plight  of the  rickshaw
puller is  in a position to demand a wholly disproportionate
hire charge for the use of the vehicles The labour and toil,
and the	 sweat and  strain, involved  in pulling  the  cycle
rickshaw works, in a few years, serious injury to the health
and stamina  and life-span  of the  rickshaw puller. He must
toil the  whole day  long in  order to	earn a small income,
most of	 which he  must hand over to the owner in payment of
the hire  charge. In  the circ circumstances, the Government
prepared a  scheme as  early as	 1970 to enable the rickshaw
puller to  extricate himself  from the	shackles of a system
which, for several decades, had debased and condemned him to
a lamentable  existence. The object was to assure him a life
where the  entire fruit	 of his	 labour and  industry  would
accrue to his own benefit. We have on the record before us a
circular No.  RMJ/1734/73 dated August 6, 1973 issued by the
Jullunder Circle  of the Punjab National Bank. Fr . the very
beginning, the	scheme extended	 a number  of concessions to
rickshaw pullers,  and as  it stood  in 1973 it provided for
loans by  the Banks  to rickshaw  pullers.  The	 loans	were
intended for  such individuals	who did	 not already own any
rickshaw and  who had  been issued  a certificate  to ply  a
rickshaw by  the municipal  authority. The loan was intended
for the purchase of a new cycle rickshaw ant extended to 90%
of the total cost of rickshaw or Rs.700 whichever was lower.
The rickshaw  purchased with the loan was to be hypothecated
to the bank and
678
registered with	 the municipal	authority in the name of the
borrower as  owner and	the bank  as financier. The advances
would be  covered by  a guarantee  extended under the Credit
Guarantee  Corporation	of  India  (Small  Loans)  Guarantee
Scheme, 1971.  The scheme contained further details relating
to payment'  of interest,  the documentation  required,	 the
mode of disbursement, the terms of repayment of the loan and
so on.	It was	in this factual context and in order to give
statutory recognition  to the  object underlying  the scheme
that the Punjab Act in 1976 was enacted.
     But learned  counsel for  the petitioners contends that
the validity of s.3 of the Punjab Act cannot be sustained on
the basis  of a	 scheme which  can be  varied it will by the
authors of  the scheme	during the  operation of  the Punjab
Act. The  scheme, it  is said,	may be	altered to  a degree
where it  cease to  be identifiable  with the  object of the
impugned legislation.  Reliance is placed by learned counsel
on The	Lord Krishna Sugar Mills Ltd. & Anr. v. The Union of
India &	 Anr. [1960]  1 S.C.R.	39. In	that case, the Court
laid  down   that  it	was   permissible   to	 judge	 the
reasonableness of  a law  on the  basis of  the	 surrounding
circumstances as  well	as  of	contemporaneous	 legislation
enacted as  part of  a single  scheme. But it also laid down
the limitations	 circumscribing that principle. Subba Rao. J
said:
	  "But I am clear in my mind that the validity of an
	  Act shall  not be  made to depend upon another Act
	  unconnected  with   the  impugned   Act  or  power
	  conferred thereunder,	 which	might,	if  properly
	  exercised, off-set  the evil	tendency or the vice
	  of the  impugned Act. If the validity of an Act is
	  made to  depend upon	such a	foundation, a super-
	  structure will  have been built on shifting sands.
	  To  do   that	 is  to	 destroy  the  stability  of
	  legislation and  to introduce an uncertain element
	  therein. If  two or  more Acts  were parts  of the
	  same scheme  of plan,	 to Implement  the  same  or
	  common objective,  or if  the impugned Act, though
	  it was  not originally  conceived at the time when
	  the earlier  Act was passed, was only as extension
	  or  a	  further  step	  by  the   legislature	 for
	  implementing the  object of  the earlier Act or if
	  the legislature  by express reference incorporated
	  in the  Impugned Act the provisions of the earlier
	  Act, it would be permissible to rely upon the said
	  provisions of	 the earlier  Act, not	because they
	  formed part of the prevailing
679
	  conditions but  because either  the  earlier	Act,
	  formed   part of  the impugned Act by reference or
	  both of  them formed	part of the same legislative
	  plan
	  .................... .........................
	  But to  go beyond this is to destroy the stability
	  of  legislation  and	to  introduce  an  uncertain
	  element. To  go  further  and	 to  depend  upon  a
	  notification of  a transitory	 nature issued under
	  an unconnected  Act is  to place  the statute in a
	  fluid state.	In such	 a  situation  its  validity
	  would depend	upon a	statutory order of temporary
	  duration; it would change colour with the changing
	  attitudes of	an authority  empowered to issue the
	  order."
     These  are	  valuable   dicta,   valid   whenever	 the
constitutionality of  a statute	 falls to be examined in the
context of contemporaneous legislation. In the present case,
however, the  Punjab Act was enacted with an eye to a scheme
already existing  and in  operation. The scheme supplied the
mechanics for  the operation of the Punjab Act. The two were
not unconnected.  They were  closely connected	and, indeed,
constituted an	integrated plan.  The apprehension  that the
validity of  the Act is dependent on the continued operation
of the	scheme which  was open to subsequent modification at
the will  of its authors has no foundation. The consequences
of such	 modification can  be taken  care of. The Punjab Act
confers on  the State  Government, by  R.7, power  to  frame
appropriate rules  in support  of and-for the furtherance of
the object  of the  Act. In  the event	of the	scheme being
altered or  modified by its authors to a degree incompatible
with the  true operation  and success of the Punjab Act, the
situation can  always be met by the State Government framing
suitable rules under 8.7 of the Act. The State Government is
not only  empowered to	do so;	it is under an obligation to
frame rules  appropriate to the successful implementation of
the legislative	 goal. It  seems to  us that  in a situation
which calls  for adjustment  from time	to time	 in view  of
varying economic  and social factors, a sufficient degree of
flexibility is	needed, and  consequently it was appropriate
for the	 Legislature to	 leave the measure of control to the
rule asking  power of the State Government. That in truth is
one of	the primary  reasons for  delegated legislation.  So
long as	 the rules  80 made  serve the object of the Act and
fall within  the limitations implied thereby no fault can be
found with them.
680
     In our  judgment, the  impugned legislation  cannot  be
regarded as  an unreasonable  restriction on the fundamental
rights	of   the  petitioner  under  Article  21  read	with
sub.cl.(g) of clause 1 of Article 19 of the Constitution.
     An	 attempt   was	made  by  learned  counsel  for	 the
petitioners to	show that  8.3 of  the Punjab Act created an
invidious distinction between rickshaw pullers and those who
carried on  the occupation  of plying other vehicle, such as
taxi-cabs, on  hire.  We  see  /  comparison.  The  pathetic
conditions in which rickshaw pullers pursue their burdensome
vocation places	 them in  a class apart from others in their
right to  ameliorative and  protective	treatment  from	 the
State. This challenge must also fail.
     Towards the  end, we  wish to express the view that the
scheme framed  by this	Court in Azad Rickshaw Pullers Union
(supra) is  a good  scheme, capable  of implementation,	 and
productive of  the object  for which  it was designed. If it
has not	 been successfully  implemented so far, it is in the
main largely  on account  of circumstances  which could have
been avoided.  Inherently, we  see no  feature in the scheme
which operates	against its effectiveness. If the scheme has
not succeeded  as was  intended By  the Court, it is largely
because appropriate  action was	 not taken  by	the  parties
concerned to  implement it.  A large  number of applications
were made  through the	Azad Rickshaw  Pullers Union  to the
Municipal Corporation for the grant of certificates enabling
the rickshaw  pullers to  obtain loans	from the  Banks. The
Municipal Corporation  was anxious  to ensure that fraud was
not practised on the scheme by existing- rickshaw owners who
could be  tempted to  apply for	 certificates in  fictitious
names and secure benefits which should have been confined to
rickshaw  pullers  as  owners  of  the	vehicles.  The	1170
applications made  through the	Azad Rickshaw  Pullers Union
could not  be related  immediately to  bona fide  individual
rickshaw pullers, and in the absence of the further material
sought	by  the	 Municipal  Corporation	 from  the  rickshaw
pullers it  would naturally  have taken considerable time to
take action  on those  applications. It	 seems to  US that a
fresh opportunity  should be provided to rickshaw pullers to
avail of  the scheme formulated by this Court. A fundamental
condition for  benefiting from the scheme is that a rickshaw
puller should  have been a licensee in the Amritsar or other
municipality within one year of the coming into force of the
Punjab Act.  We think that the range of eligibility should /
t be confined by that limitation. We think it desirable that
the  Municipal	Corporation  should  determine	the  maximum
number of licenses which should be granted
681
for plying cycle rickshaws within its jurisdictional limits,
keeping in  mind the  needs of	the travelling public on the
one hand  and the  danger of uneconomic plying on the other.
Every rickshaw	puller proposing  to take  advantage of	 the
scheme should  apply to	 the Municipal	Commissioner  for  a
certificate, the  period within	 which such applications may
be filed  being notified  by the  Municipal Corporation from
time to time as the need arises. All the application will be
considered, in	the serial order in which they are received,
for the	 grant of  a  certificate  on  the  basis  of  which
rickshaw puller	 may take  further steps  envisaged  in	 the
scheme for the grant of financial assistance enabling him to
purchase 8  cycle rickshaw  for plying	by him. The ISSUE of
such  certificate   shall  be	subject	 to   the  following
conditions:
     1. Each  certificate shall be granted in respect of one
cycle rickshaw only.
     2. The  number of	certificates issued shall not exceed
the maximum,  if any,  fixed by the Municipal Corporation as
the total  strength of	the cycle  rickshaws allowed  to ply
within its jurisdictional limits.
     3. No  person shall  be granted  more   than  one	such
certificate.
     4. Preference  shall be given in the matter of granting
certificates to	 those rickshaw	 pullers who  have  plied  a
cycle rickshaw	for one year before the Punjab Act came into
force.
     On receipt	 of the	 certificates, the  rickshaw pullers
may take further steps for the purpose of securing financial
ASSISTANCE in accordance with the terms of the scheme.
     We are  unable to	hold that  the Punjab Act of 1976 is
ultra vires and that the scheme propounded by this 'Court in
Azad  Rickshaw	Pullers	 Union	(supra)	 is  unworkable	 and
ineffective. We	 believe that  given appropriate  compliance
the scheme  will provide  adequate relief  to  the  rickshaw
pullers	 and  constitute  an  effective	 supplementary	code
fulfilling the object of the Punjab Act.
     In the  CIRCUMSTANCES, we dismiss these writ petitions,
but without any order as to costs.
N.V.K.					Petitions dismissed.
682




