

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Saboj Kumar Bose vs Kanailal Mondal & Ors on 6 August, 1985Equivalent citations: 1985 AIR 1674, 1985 SCR  Supl. (2) 393
Author: R Misra
Bench: Misra, R.B. (J)
           PETITIONER:
SABOJ KUMAR BOSE

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
KANAILAL MONDAL & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT06/08/1985

BENCH:
MISRA, R.B. (J)
BENCH:
MISRA, R.B. (J)
VENKATARAMIAH, E.S. (J)

CITATION:
 1985 AIR 1674		  1985 SCR  Supl. (2) 393
 1985 SCC  (3) 717	  1985 SCALE  (2)244


ACT:
     West Bengal  Estates Acquisition Act, 1953 sections 4,5
and 6.
     Tank fisheries-Whether  vest in  State or	intermediary
Tank fishery-What is-Retention of possession by intermediary
-Khas possession-Whether essential.



HEADNOTE:
     The   respondents'	  Predecessor-in-interest   took   a
permanent lease	 of fishery right in a tank without the sub-
soil  from  different  sets  of	 proprietors  be  virtue  of
registered  Kabuliyats	 4th  November	 1914  and  came  in
possession thereof.  There-after on  14th June 1952 their in
their turn  granted a  registered lease	 of the said fishery
right to  the appellant	 for a	ter of	11  years  upto	 and
including the Bengali year 1369.
     Under the West Bengal Estates Acquisition Act 1953, the
interest of  intermediaries vested  in the State with effect
from 15th April, 1955.
     The respondents  filed a  suit for the recovery of rent
for the years 1361 and 1362 B.S. together with interest. The
claim was  resisted be	the appellant  and it  was a averred
that the  interest in  the fishery  hat vested	in the State
from 1362  B.S. ant 80 the contract created be the leave had
been frustrated,  and that he was not liable to pay rent for
1352 B.S. ant that the last year's rent deposited in advance
was to	be credited  towards rent  for 1361  B.S. The Munsif
decreed the  suit in  part holding  that the interest of the
plaintiff-respondents did  not vest in the State, it being a
tank fishery,  the lease  continued to	subsist and the rent
for 1360  B.S. paid in advance could not be credited towards
rent for  1361 B.S. This order was upheld be the Subordinate
Judge as well as the High Court.
     In the  appeals to	 this Court, on the question whether
the right ant interest of the plaintiff-respondents hat come
to an  end by  virtue of  the coming  into force of the West
Bengal Estates Acquisition Act, 1953,
394
     Dismissing the Appeal.
^
     HELD: 1.  On a  plain reading  of section 6 of the West
Bengal Estates	Acquisition Act 1953 tank fisheries will not
vest in	 the State  but will be retained by an intermediary.
In the	instant case, even assuming that the plaintiffs were
intermediaries their right in the tank fisher did no come to
an end. [396 F]
     2. Khas  possession is  not a  necessary condition	 for
retaining the  property by  an intermediary.  In the instant
case, the  interest of	the plaintiffs	did not	 vest in the
State either  as tenants  or as intermediaries. The evidence
shows that  the plaintiffs  have the status of tenants which
has been recoginsed by the government by accepting rent from
them. [397 A-B]
     3. The  fishery  in  dispute  is  a  tank	fishery	 and
satisfies the  requirements  of	 the  explanation  added  to
clauses (e) of sub-section (1) of section 6. [397 E]
     4. The  provisions of  Chapter VI of the Act were given
effect to  from Baisakh	 1363 B.S. The present case involves
recovery of  rent for the years 1361 and 1362 B.S. There was
no difficulty  in recovering  the rent for the year 1361 and
1362 B.S.  inasmuch as every non-agricultural tenant holding
any land  under an intermediary and every raiyat holding any
land under  an intermediary  shall bold	 the  same  directly
under the  State. The  defendant got  the land under a lease
and cannot  deny right	and title  of the  plaintiffs at the
commencement   of the tenancy. It has not been show that the
lessor's title	has subsequently come to an end. Considering
from any  aspect there is no escape from the conclusion that
the plaintiffs	still retain  their rights in respect of the
tank fisher  any they  are entitled  to recover the rent for
the years 1361 and 1362 B.S. [397- G-H, 398 A]



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION :  Civil Appeal Nos. 887-
888 of 1971.
     From the  Judgment ant  Order dated  11.4.1963  of	 the
Calcutta High  Court in	 Appeals from Appellate Decrees Nos.
958/57 and 549 of 1971.
     D.N. Mukharjee for the Appellant.
     P.K. Chatterjee and Rathin DASS for the Respondents.
395
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     MISRA,J.  The   present  two  consolidated	 appeals  by
certificate are	 directed against  the judgment	 of the High
Court of Calcutta dated 11th April, 1963.
     The dispute  between the parties centers round a Jalkar
fishery right  in a tank known as Teremara JaIkar situate in
village Chandiguri  in the  district  of  24-Parganas.	Hari
Charan Mondal,	predecessor in	interest of  the respondents
took a	permanent lease of the said fishery without the sub-
soil  from  different  sets  of	 proprietors  by  virtue  of
registered Kabuliyats  dated 4th  November, 1914  on certain
rent and case in possession thereof. Thereafter on 14th June
1952 they  in their  turn granted  a registered lease of the
said fishery  right to	the appellant for a term of 11 years
upto and  including the	 Bengali year 1369 at an annual rent
of Rs. 650.
     Under the	West Bengal  Estates Acquisition  Act, 1953,
hereinafter referred  to as  'the Act',	 the interest of the
intermediaries vested  in the  State  of  West	Bengal	with
effect from  15th April,  1955. The respondents filed a suit
for the	 recovery of Rs. 1440 as rent for the years 1361 and
1362 B.S.  together with interest. The claim was resisted by
the appellant  and his	defence in  the main  was  that	 the
interest in  the fishery  had vested  in the State from 1362
B.S. under  the said Act and so the contract  created by the
lease had  been frustrated  and he is not liable to pay rent
for 1362  B.S., that  the  last	 year's	 rent  deposited  in
advance was to be credited towards rent for 1361 B.S. and as
such no	 rent was  due from  him. The learned Munsif decreed
the suit  in part  with interest  at the  rate of 6-1/4% per
annum holding that the interest of the plaintiff-respondents
did not	 vest in the State, it being a tank fishery, so that
the lease  continued to	 subsist and  the rent for 1369 B.S.
paid in	 advance could not be credited towards rent for 1361
B.S. On appeal by the defendant the Subordinate Judge upheld
the judgment  and decree  of the  Munsif holding that in any
case the  interest of  the plaintiffs had not come to an end
and the contract as such subsisted and they were entitled to
recover the  amount claimed.  Undaunted by  the failure	 the
defendant filed	 a second  appeal before the High Court. The
High Court  also confirmed  the judgment  of the Subordinate
Judge and  dismissed the  appeal. The defendant has now come
up to this Court, as stated earlier, by certificate.
396
     The learned  counsel for  the appellant  has reiterated
the same  contentions before  this court  as well.  The only
pertinent question for consideration in this case is whether
the right  and interest of the plaintiffs had come to an end
by virtue  of the  Act. It  was contended  for the appellant
that the  lease granted	 by the	 plaintiffs in favour of the
defendant-appellant was	 a lease  of a fishery right without
the sub-soil.  The fishery  right, so  contends the counsel,
was only  a profit-a-prendre which amounts to an encumbrance
within the  meaning of	the Act and when the interest of the
plaintiff-landlords vested  in the State of West Bengal free
from encumbrances  the plaintiffs  right  ceased  to  exist.
Alternatively it  was argued  that even	 assuming  that	 the
fishery right  was   an encumbrance,  the defendant  being a
non-agricultural tenant	 within the  meaning of	 the Act and
the plaintiffs	having an  interest superior  to that of the
defendant, they	 were intermediaries  as defined  in the Act
and their interest had vested in the State.
     Section 4	of the	Act provides  for the vesting of the
interest of  the intermediary  in the  State free  from	 all
encumbrances.  Section	 6  of	 the  Act   authorises	 the
intermediary to	 retain certain	 properties in	spite of the
vesting, including  tank fisheries.  Sub-section (2)  of s.6
provided that  an intermediary	who is	entitled  to  retain
possession of  any land	 under sub-s.(1)  shall be deemed to
hold such  land directly  under the  State from	 the date of
vesting as a tenant subject to certain terms. The proviso to
sub-s.(2) contemplates	that if any tank fishery or any land
comprised  in	a  tea-garden,	orchard,  mill,	 factory  or
workshop was  held immediately	before the  date of  vesting
under a lease, such lease shall be deemed-to have been given
by the	State Government on the same terms and conditions as
immediately before  subject to	such modification therein as
the State  Government may  think fit  to move.	On  a  plain
reading of  s. 6  tank fisheries  will not vest in the State
but will  be retained by an intermediary. Thus even assuming
that the  plaintiffs were  intermediates their	right in the
tank fishery did not come to an end.
     It was,  however,	contended  for	the  appellant	that
unless the  plaintiffs were in actual possession of the tank
fishery the  same will	vest in the State and s.6 saves only
such persons  who were in actual possession of the property.
This contention	 cannot be  accepted for  the obvious reason
that s.6 itself has clearly specified in some of its clauses
khas possession	 and not  in  other  clauses,  for  example,
cl.(d) of  sub-s.(1) of s.6 reads: "agricultural land in his
khas possession , but no such khas possession
397
is contemplated by cl.(e) of sub-s. (1) of s.6. It only says
'tank fisheries'.  It is,  therefore, quite  clear that khas
possession is  not a  necessary condition  for retaining the
property by an intermediary. The kabuliyats Exts. 3 and 3(A)
and rent  receipts Exts. 2 and 2(A) and the return submitted
by one	of the	landlords, Ext.4, describe the plaintiffs as
tenants. They  have been  so described	in  the	 plaintiffs'
Ledger of  Land Reforms Department, Ext. 5, and their status
has also  been recognised  as tenants  by the  Government by
accepting rent from them (Exts. 2 and 2A). Thus the interest
of the	plaintiffs did	not vest  in  the  State  either  as
tenants or as intermediaries.
     The fishery  in question  is a tank fishery as would be
evident form the explanation added to cl.(e) of sub-s.(1) of
s.6. It reads :
	  "Explanation - "tank fishery" means a reservior or
	  place for  the storage  of water,  whether  formed
	  naturally or	by excavation  or by construction Of
	  embankments, which  is being used for pisciculture
	  or for fishing, together with the sub-soil and the
	  banks of  such reservoir  or	place,	except	such
	  portion  of	the  banks  as	are  included  in  a
	  homestead or	in a  garden or orchard and includes
	  any right  or	 pisciculture  or  fishing  in	such
	  reservoir or place."
The fishery  in dispute	 satisfies the	requirements of	 the
Explanation added  to cl.(e)  of sub-s.(1) of 5.6. Section 5
of the	Act provides  the effect  of notification under s.4.
Clause (c) of sub-s.(1) of s.5 contemplates:
	  "(c) subject	to the	provisions of sub-section(3)
	  of  Section	6,  every   non-agricultural  tenant
	  holding any  land under an intermediary, and until
	  the provisions  of Chapter VI are given effect to,
	  every	  raiyat   holding   any   land	  under	  an
	  intermediary, shall  hold the	 same directly under
	  the  State,	as  if	 the  State   had  been	 the
	  intermediary, and on the same terms and conditions
	  as immediately before the date of vesting."
The provisions of Chapter VI of the Act were given effect to
from Baisakh  1363 B.S.	 but in	 the  present  case  we	 are
concerned with	the recovery  of rent for the years 1361 and
1362 B.S.  In this  view of  the matter	 also there  was  no
difficulty in recovering the rent for the year 1361 and 1362
B.S. inasmuch  as every	 non-agricultural tenant holding any
land under an intermediary and every
398
raiyat holding any land under an intermediary shall hold the
same directly  under the  State. Considered  from any aspect
there is  no escape  from the conclusion that the plaintiffs
still retain their rights in respect of the tank fishery and
they are entitled to recover the rent for the years 1361 and
1362 B.S.
     There is  yet another aspect which cannot be lost sight
of. The defendant got the land under a lease. He cannot deny
right and title of the plaintiffs at the commencement of the
tenancy. The  counsel for the appellant has not been able to
show that  the lessor's	 title has  subsequently come  to an
end.  We   have	 already  held	that  the  interest  of	 the
plaintiffs had	not vested  in the  State and, therefore, we
find no fault with the view taken by the High Court.
     The appeals, therefore, must fail. They are accordingly
dismissed, but	in the	circumstances of  the case we direct
the parties to bear their own cost of this Court.
A.P.J.					 Appeals dismissed.
399




