

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Rattan Lal & Ors. Etc.Etc vs State Of Haryana & Ors on 16 August, 1985Equivalent citations: 1987 AIR  478, 1985 SCR  Supl. (2) 569
Author: E Venkataramiah
Bench: Venkataramiah, E.S. (J)
           PETITIONER:
RATTAN LAL & ORS. ETC.ETC.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF HARYANA & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT16/08/1985

BENCH:
VENKATARAMIAH, E.S. (J)
BENCH:
VENKATARAMIAH, E.S. (J)
MISRA, R.B. (J)

CITATION:
 1987 AIR  478		  1985 SCR  Supl. (2) 569
 1985 SCC  (4)	43	  1985 SCALE  (2)354
 CITATOR INFO :
 RF	    1991 SC1286	 (5)


ACT:
     Constitution of  India 1950, Articles 14 and 16 - State
Government -  Appointment of  'ad hoc'	teachers in  regular
vacancies - Validity and legality of.



HEADNOTE:
     On the  question  whether	it  is	open  to  the  State
Government to  appoint teachers	 on an	ad-hoc basis  at the
commencement  of   an  academic	 year  and  terminate  their
services  before   the	commencement   of  the	next  summer
vacation, or  earlier, to  appoint them	 again on  an ad-hoc
basis at  the commencement  of next  academic  year  and  to
terminate their	 services before  the  commencement  of	 the
succeeding summer  vacation or earlier and to continue to do
80 year after year.
^
     HELD: 1.  The policy  of "ad-hocism"  followed  by	 the
State Government  in the appointment of teachers for quite a
long period  has led  to the breach of Articles 14 ant 16 of
the Constitution.  Such a  situation cannot  be permitted to
last  any  longer.  The	 State	Government  is	expected  to
function as a motel employer. [571 E]
     In the instant case the State Government is directed to
take immediate	steps to  fill up  in  accordance  with	 the
relevant  rules	  the  vacancies  in  which  those  who	 are
appointed on  an at-hoc	 basis are  now working ant to allow
all those who are now holding these posts on an at-hoc basis
to remain  in those posts till the vacancies are duly fillet
up.  These   at-hoc  teachers	shall  be  paid	 salary	 ant
allowances for the period of summer vacation as long as they
held office.  Those who are entitled to maternity or medical
leave, shall  also be  granted such leave in accordance with
the rules.[571 F, 572 A-B]
     2. The  State Government has a duty to appoint teachers
in existing  vacancies in  accordance with  the	 rules.	 The
State Government  has  failed  to  discharge  that  duty.  A
substantial number  of ad-hoc  appointments are	 mate in the
existing vacancies which have remained unfilled for three to
four years.  In some  cases the	 appointments are made for a
period of six months only and they are renewed after a break
of a few days. [571 A-Bl
570
     The number	 of teachers  in the State who are appointed
on such	 ad-hoc basis  is very large indeed. If the teachers
had been  appointed regularly, they would have been entitled
to the benefits of summer vacation along with the salary and
allowances payable  in respect	of that	 period and  to	 all
other  privileges   such  as  casual  leave  medical  leave,
maternity  leave   etc.	 available  to	all  the  Government
servants. These benefits are denied to these ad-hoc teachers
unreasonably  on   account  of	this  pernicious  system  of
appointment adopted by the State Government. [571 B-C]
     3. These  teachers	 who  constitute  the  bulk  of	 the
educated unemployed are compelled to accept these jobs on an
ad-hoc basis  with  miserable  conditions  of  service.	 The
Government appears  to be exploiting this situation. This is
not a  sound personnel	policy. It  is bound to have serious
repercussions  on   the	 educational  Institutions  and	 the
children studying there. [571 D]



JUDGMENT:
     ORIGINAL JURISDICTION  : Writ Petitions Nos. 4600,4600A
of 1985 etc.
     (Under Article 32 of the Constitution of India.)
     Rishi Kumar,  S.M. Ashri,	Naunit Lal,  Kailash Vasdev,
Mrs. Vinod  Arya, R.C. Pathak, Vishnu Mathur, Mahabir Singh,
Pankaj Kalra, Serva Mitter, R.P. Singh, K.C. Dua, N.D. Garg,
S. Srinivasan,	Rathin Dass,  K.K.  Gupta,  S.K.  Bagga,  R.
Ramachandran S.K.  Bisaria, Laxmi  Arvind,  K.P.  Gupta,  R.
Bana, Ranbir  Singh Yadav, H.M. Singh, Mrs. S.C.Jindal, R.K.
Agnihotri, B.S.	 Gupta, P.C.  Kapur, Kripal  Singh and Amlan
Ghosh for the Petitioners.
     V.C. Mahajan, I.S. Goel, C.V. Subba Rao and R.N. Poddar
for the Respondents.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     VENTAKARAMIAH, J.	In all	these petitions	 the  common
question which	arises for decision is whether it is open to
the State  Government to appoint teachers on an ad-hoc basis
at the	commencement of an academic year and terminate their
services before	 the commencement of the next s = r vacation
or earlier  to appoint	them again on an ad-hoc basis at the
commencement of	 next academic	year and  to terminate their
services before	 the commencement  of the  succeeding summer
vacation or  earlier and  to continue  to do  so year  after
year. A	 substantial number  of such ad-hoc appointments are
made in the existing vacancies which have
571
remained unfilled for three to four years. It is the duty of
the State  Government to  take steps  to appoint teachers in
those vacancies	 in accordance	with the  rules as  early as
possible. The  State Government	 of Haryana  has  failed  to
discharge that	duty in	 these cases. It has been appointing
teachers for  quite some  time on  an ad-hoc basis for short
periods as  stated above  without any justifiable reason. In
some cases  the appointments  are made	for a  period of six
months only  and they  are renewed  after a  break of  a few
days. The number of teachers in the State of Haryana who are
thus appointed on such ad-hoc basis is very large indeed. If
the teachers  had been	appointed regularly  they would have
been entitled  to the benefits of summer vacation along with
the salary  and allowance  payable in respect of that period
and to	all other  privileges such  as casual leave, medical
leave, maternity  leave etc. available to all the Government
servants. These benefits are denied to these ad-hoc teachers
unreasonably  on   account  of	this  pernicious  system  of
appointment adopted  by the  State Government.	These ad-hoc
teachers are unnecessarily subjected to an arbitrary 'hiring
and firing'  policy. These  teachers who constitute the bulk
of the	educated unemployed  are compelled  to accept  these
jobs  on  an  ad-hoc  basis  with  miserable  conditions  of
service.  The  government  appears  to	be  exploiting	this
situation. This is not a sound personnel policy. It is bound
to   have   serious   repercussions   on   the	 educational
institutions and  the children studying there. The policy of
'ad-hocism' followed  by the  State Government	for  a	long
period has led to the breach of Article 14 and Article 16 of
the Constitution.  Such a  situation cannot  be permitted to
last any  longer. It  is needless  to  say  that  the  State
Government is expected to function as a model employer.
     We, therefore,  direct the	 State	Government  to	take
immediate steps	 to fill  up in accordance with the relevant
rules the  vacanies in	which those  who are appointed on an
ad-hoc basis  are now working and to allow all those who are
now holding  these posts  on ad-hoc basis to remain in those
posts till  the vacancies  are duly  filled up. The teachers
who are	 now working  on such  ad-hoc basis if they have the
prescribed qualification  may also apply for being appointed
regularly in  those posts.  The State  Government  may	also
consider  sympathetically   the	 question  of  relaxing	 the
qualification of  maximum age  prescribed for appointment to
those posts  in the  case of  those who have been victims of
this  system   of  'ad-hoc'  appointments.  If	any  of	 the
petitioners in	these petitions	 has under any existing rule
acquired the  right to	be treated  as a regularly appointed
teacher,  his	case  shall   be  considered  by  the  State
Government and	an appropriate	order may  be passed  in his
case.
572
     We	 strongly   deprecate  the   policy  of	  the  State
Government under  which 'ad-hoc'  teachers  are	 denied	 the
salary and  allowances for the period of the summer vacation
by resorting to the fictional breaks of the type referred to
above. These  'ad-hoc' teachers	 shall be  paid	 salary	 and
allowances for the period of summer vacation as long as they
hold the  office under this order. Those who are entitled to
maternity or medical leave, shall also be granted such leave
in accordance with the rules.
     If the  petitioners have any other grievances, they may
approach the High Court of Punjab and Haryana.
     These petitions are accordingly disposed of.
A.P.J.					 Petition dismissed.
573




