

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
The State Of Andhra Pradesh vs Nav Swadeshi Oil Mills on 3 November, 1987Equivalent citations: 1988 AIR   97, 1988 SCR  (1) 736
Author: E Venkataramiah
Bench: Venkataramiah, E.S. (J)
           PETITIONER:
THE STATE OF ANDHRA PRADESH

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
NAV SWADESHI OIL MILLS

DATE OF JUDGMENT03/11/1987

BENCH:
VENKATARAMIAH, E.S. (J)
BENCH:
VENKATARAMIAH, E.S. (J)
RANGNATHAN, S.

CITATION:
 1988 AIR   97		  1988 SCR  (1) 736
 1987 SCC  Supl.  388	  JT 1987 (4)	234
 1987 SCALE  (2)920


ACT:
     Andhra Pradesh  General Sales  Tax Act,  1957: ss. 13 &
14(1)  &   14(3)/Central  Sales	 Tax  Act,  1956:  s.  9(2)-
Applicability of-Returns  not filed  within  the  prescribed
period-Assessments made	 after expiry  of  four	 years	from
assessment  year-Held,	 cases	fall   under  s.  14(3)	 and
assessment can	be made	 within six years from expiry of the
assessment year.



HEADNOTE:
%
     Sub-section (2)  of s.  9 of the Central Sales Tax Act,
1956 makes  the assessment  procedure prescribed  under	 the
general sales tax law of the appropriate State applicable to
the assessment	to be made under the Central Act. Section 13
of the	Andhra Pradesh	General Sales Tax Act, 1957 requires
the dealer  to submit  returns in  such manner,	 within such
period and  to such  authority as  may be  prescribed.	Sub-
section (1)  of s.  14 permits	the assessing  authority  to
assess the  amount of tax due on the returns submitted under
s. 13  only within a period of four years from the expiry of
the year  to which  the assessment  relates. Sub-section (3)
permits	 the  assessing	 authority  to	make  best  judgment
assessment where  a dealer (i) fails to submit return before
the date  prescribed; (ii)  produces the  accounts registers
and other  documents after  inspection and  (iii) submits  a
return subsequent to the date of inspection, within a period
of six	years from  the expiry	of the	year  to  which	 the
assessment relates.
     In the  main appeal  before this  Court  the  assessee-
respondent filed  its return  relating to the quarter ending
31st March, 1969 on 7th August, 1969 under the Central Sales
Tax Act. The last date prescribed by law was 24th May, 1969.
The Commercial	Tax officer  passed the	 assessment order on
3rd August,  1973, beyond  four years from 31st March, 1969,
the last  day of the assessment year 1968-69. The assessee's
appeals against	 that order  were dismissed by the Assistant
Commissioner and  the Sales Tax Appellate Tribunal. The High
Court in  revision, however,  held that	 the assessment made
after four  years from	the last  day of the assessment year
was not a valid assessment.
737
     In the  connected appeal  the respondent  who  was	 the
assessee  filed	  the  annual	return	in  respect  of	 the
assessment year	 1968-69  under	 the  A	 provisions  of	 the
Central Act  on 19th  August, 1969  after the  expiry of the
prescribed date.  The order  of assessment was passed on 2nd
August, 1973  beyond four  years from  the last	 day of	 the
assessment year	 196869. An  appeal against  that order	 was
dismissed by  the  Assistant  Commissioner.  The  Sales	 Tax
Appellate Tribunal, however, allowed the appeal holding that
the assessment	had been  passed beyond	 four years from the
last day  of the  assessment  year.  The  revision  petition
preferred by  the State	 was dismissed in limine by the High
Court.
     In the  appeals by special leave filed by the State, it
was contended  for the	respondent that since the returns in
the cases had been accepted, even though they had filed been
beyond the  prescribed date,  the assessments  made  thereon
could not  be considered  as best  judgment assessments and,
therefore, sub-section	(3) of	s. 14 of the Act under which
it is permissible to make best judgment assessments would be
inapplicable.
     Allowing the appeals. D
^
     HELD: 1.1 on a true construction of sub-s. (1) and sub-
s. (3) of s. 14 of the Andhra Pradesh General Sales Tax Act,
1957 it	 is apparent  that where  a return is not filed by a
dealer before  the date	 prescribed in that behalf under the
Act the assessing authority has jurisdiction to complete the
assessment within  a period  of six years from the expiry of
the year to which the assessment relates. [744C]
     1.2 The  two types of cases which fall under sub-s. (1)
and sub-s. (3) of s. 14 of the Act respectively are mutually
exclusive. The return on the basis of which an assessment is
to be  made under  s. 14(1)  is a  return filed	 within	 the
prescribed period  and in  such a case the assessment has to
be completed  within a	period of four years from the expiry
of the	period to  which the  assessment  relates.  The	 Act
confers a  distinct advantage on such a dealer who is prompt
in filing  his	return	inasmuch  as  he  acquires  immunity
against assessment  on the expiry of the said period of four
years. All  cases where	 the return  is submitted beyond the
prescribed date	 fall under  sub-s. (3) of s. 14 of the Act.
Assessment in  such cases  may be completed within six years
from the expiry of the year to which the assessment relates.
When once  it is established in a case that a return has not
been filed  within the	prescribed period  such	 case  falls
outside s. 14(1) of the Act and therefore the period of four
years prescribed therein becomes automatically inapplicable.
It clearly falls under cl. (i) of sub-s. (3) of s. 14 of the
Act and assessment can be H
738
     made in  such a case within the expiry of the period of
six years.  In the  instant cases the returns were not filed
within	the   prescribed  dates.   The	 assessments   have,
therefore, been	 rightly made  within  six  years  from	 the
expiry of the year to which the assessments relate. [742G-H;
743A-B; 744C]
     2. Whether	 the assessment made is the best judgment or
not has	 no bearing  at all  on the  period within  which an
assessment can	be made	 under the  Act. It depends upon the
other conditions  mentioned in	sub-s. (1) and (3) of s. 14.
Best judgment  assessment can be made even in a case falling
under sub-s. (1), as is evident from the latter part of that
sub-section which  reads: "but	if the return appears to him
to be  incorrect or  incomplete he  shall after	 giving	 the
dealer a  reasonable opportunity  of proving the correctness
and completeness  of the  return submitted by him and making
such inquiry as he deems necessary, to assess to the best of
his judgment,  the amount  of tax  due from the dealer." Yet
such best  judgment assessment	has to be completed within a
period of  four years  from the	 expiry of the year to which
the assessment	relates.  Therefore,  in  the  instant	case
merely	because	  the  assessments  are	 not  best  judgment
assessments, it	 cannot be  said that sub-s. (3) of s. 14 is
inapplicable. Neither  the High	 Court nor the Tribunal gave
adequate attention  to the words 'before the date prescribed
in that behalf' in cl. (i) of sub-s. (3) of s. 14. They laid
emphasis only  on the  words 'fails to submit return' in the
said sub-clause	 to arrive  at a wrong conclusion. [743C, H;
744A-B]
     State of  Andhra  Pradesh	v.  Pyarelal  Malhotra,	 (13
S.T.C. 946),  and State	 of Madras  v. S.G.  Jayaraj Nadar &
Sons, 28 S.T.C. 700, distinguished.



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 4448 of
1985.
     From the  Judgment and  order dated 26. 10. 1982 of the
Andhra Pradesh	High Court  in Tax  Revision Case  No. 23 of
1978.
			      WITH
     Civil Appeal No. 694 of 1986.
     From the  Judgment and  order dated  31.7.1985  of	 the
Andhra Pradesh	High Court  in Tax  Revision Case No. 205 of
1985.
     T.V.S.N. Chari for the Appellant.
739
     R. Ramachandran for the Respondents.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     VENKATARAMIAH, J.	The question  of law which arises in
these two  appeals by special leave being a common, they are
disposed of  by this  common  judgment.	 The  said  question
relates to  the time  within which an assessment can be made
under the provisions of the Andhra Pradesh General Sales Tax
Act, 1957  (hereinafter referred  to as 'the Act') where the
return is not filed by the dealer within the time prescribed
in that behalf.
     The assessee  in Civil  Appeal No. 4448 of 1985 is M/s.
Nav Swadeshi  oil Mills,  Jadcharla, Mahboobnagar  district.
For assessment	year 1968-69  the assessee  filed its return
relating to the quarter ending 31.3. ,969 on 7.8.1969 before
the Commercial Tax Officer of Mahboobnagar under the Central
Sales Tax Act, 1956 even though the last date for submission
of return prescribed by law was 24.5. 1969. The return filed
by  the	  assessee  showing   a	 taxable   turnover  of	 Rs.
18,25,410.72 was  accepted and	it was	called upon  to	 pay
sales tax  of Rs.45,424.48  under the  Act.  The  assessment
order  was   passed  on	 3.8.1973  beyond  four	 years	from
31.3.1969 which	 was the  last day  of the  assessment	year
1968-69. Aggrieved  by the  assessment order  which had been
passed beyond  the period of four years from the last day of
the assessment	year the assessee filed an appeal before the
Assistant Commissioner	(CT) Appeals, Warangal in Appeal No.
5 75-76	 and that appeal was dismissed on 14.9.1976. Against
the  order  of	the  Assistant	Commissioner  (CT)  Appeals.
Warangal the  assessee filed  an appeal before the Sales Tax
Appellate Tribunal,  Andhra Pradesh at Hyderabad in Tribunal
Appeal No.  183 of 1977. That appeal also was dismissed. The
assessee  thereafter   filed  a	 revision  petition  in	 Tax
Revision Case No. 23 of 1978 before the High Court of Andhra
Pradesh. The  High Court by its order dated October 26, 1982
set aside  the order of the Tribunal and also the assessment
on the	ground that  the assessment  which had	been  passed
after four  years from	the last  day of the assessment year
was not a valid assessment. Aggrieved by the decision of the
High Court the State of Andhra Pradesh has filed this appeal
by special leave.
     The assessee  in Civil  Appeal No.	 694 of 1986 is M s.
Nav Swadeshi oil Mills and Refinery at Jadcharla. In respect
of the	assessment year 1968-69 the assessee filed an annual
return under  the provisions  of the  Central Sales Tax Act,
1956 on 19.8. 1969 after the expiry
740
Of the prescribed period. The order of assessment was passed
on 2.8.1973  beyond four  years from  the last	day  of	 the
assessment year	 1968-69. Aggrieved  by the assessment order
which  had  been  passed  by  the  assessing  authority	 the
assessee filed	an appeal  before the Assistant Commissioner
(CT) Appeals,  Warangal on  the ground	that the asssessment
order passed  beyond four  years from  the last	 day of	 the
assessment  year   was	barred	by  time.  That	 appeal	 was
dismissed. Against  the order  passed  in  that	 appeal	 the
assessee filed	an appeal  before the  Sales  Tax  Appellate
Tribunal, Andhra Pradesh in Tribunal Appeal No. 206 of 1977.
The Tribunal allowed the appeal and set aside the assessment
holding that  the assessment  had been	passed beyond  time.
Aggrieved by  the decision  of the  Tribunal  the  State  of
Andhra Pradesh	filed a	 Revision Petition  in Tax  Revision
Case No. 205 of 1985 on the file of the High Court of Andhra
Pradesh. That  Revision Petition  was dismissed in limine by
the High  Court. Aggrieved by the decision of the High Court
the State of Andhra Pradesh has filed this appeal by special
leave.
     The only  question which  arises for  consideration  in
these appeals  is whether  the orders  of assessment  in the
above two cases which had admittedly been passed beyond four
years from  the last  day of  the assessment year but within
the period  of six  years from	that date  had been  validly
passed. By virtue of section 9 of the Central Sales Tax Act,
1956 the procedure prescribed for making an assessment under
the Act	 is applicable	to the	assessments to be made under
the Central  Sales Tax	Act, 1956.  Section 13	of  the	 Act
prescribes that	 every dealer  who is  liable to get himself
registered under  section 12 or section 12-A as the case may
be under  the  Act  shall  submit  such	 return	 or  returns
relating to  his turnover  in such manner within such period
and to	such authority	as may	be prescribed.	The material
part of	 section 14  which is relevant for purposes of these
cases reads thus:
	       "14. Assessment of tax: ( I) If the assessing
	  authority is	satisfied that	any return submitted
	  under section 13 is correct and complete, he shall
	  assess the  amount of tax payable by the dealer on
	  the basis  thereof, but  if the  return appears to
	  him to  be incorrect or incomplete he shall, after
	  giving the  dealer  a	 reasonable  opportunity  of
	  proving the  correctness and	completeness of	 the
	  return submitted by him and making such inquiry as
	  he deems  necessary, assess  to the  best  of	 his
	  judgment, the	 amount of  tax due from the dealer.
	  An assessment	 under this  section shall  be	made
	  only within a period of four years from the expiry
	  of the
741
	  year to which the assessment relates.
		       ...................
	  (3) Where any dealer liable to tax under this Act-
	  (i)  fails   to  submit  return  before  the	date
	  prescribed in that behalf, or
	  (ii) produces	 the accounts,	registered and other
	  documents after inspection, or
	  (iii) submits	 a return  subsequent to the date of
	  inspection, the  assessing authority	may, at	 any
	  time within  a period of six years from the expiry
	  of the  year to  which assessment  relates,  after
	  issuing a  notice to	the dealer  and	 after	such
	  enquiry as  he considers  necessary, assess to the
	  best of  his judgment,  the amount of tax due from
	  the dealer  on his turnover for that year, and may
	  direct the dealer to pay in addition to the tax so
	  assessed penalty as specified in subsection (8)."
     It is  necessary to  analyse sub-section  (1) and	sub-
section (3)  of section	 14  of	 the  Act  for	purposes  of
determining the issue involved in these cases. Sub-section (
]) of  section 14  of the Act provides that if the assessing
authority is  satisfied	 that  any  return  submitted  under
section 13  is correct	and complete,  he shall	 assess	 the
amount of tax payable by the dealer on the basis thereof but
if the	return appears	to the	assessing  authority  to  be
incorrect or  incomplete he  shall after  giving the  dealer
reasonable  opportunity	  of  proving  the  correctness	 and
completeness of the return submitted and making such inquiry
as he  deems necessary,	 assess to the best of his judgment,
the amount  of tax  due from the dealer. In both these cases
the return  contemplated is  one which	has  been  filed  in
accordance with	 section 13  of	 the  Act  within  the	time
prescribed for	that purpose.  Such an assessment under sub-
section (  1) of  section 14 of the Act can be made within a
period of  four years from the expiry of the period to which
the assessment relates. Sub-section (3) of section 14 of the
Act authorises the assessing authority to make an assessment
to the	best of	 his judgment  in three	 cases: (i)  where a
dealer under  the Act fails to submit return before the date
prescribed in  that behalf, (ii) where a dealer produces the
accounts. registers and other documents after inspection and
(iii) where a dealer submits a return subsequent to the date
of inspection. In these three cases the
742
assessing authority  is empowered  to make  an assessment to
the best  of '4	 his judgment at any time within a period of
six  years  from  the  expiry  of  the	year  to  which	 the
assessment relates  after issuing a notice to the dealer and
after such  inquiry which he considers necessary to make the
assessment.
     The crucial  question which arises for consideration in
these cases  is whether in a case where the assessee submits
a true	and complete  return after  the prescribed  date the
assessment should be completed within a period of four years
prescribed by  sub-section (  1) of section 14 of the Act or
within a period of six years permitted under sub-section (3)
of section  14 of  the Act. Sub-section (1) of section 14 of
the Act	 relates to  an assessment  which may be made on the
basis of  a return  submitted under  section 13	 of the Act.
Section 13  of the  Act as  stated above provides that every
dealer shall  submit such  return or returns relating to his
turnover in  such manner  within such  period  and  to	such
authority as  may be  prescribed. The return on the basis of
which an assessment is to be made under section 14(1) of the
Act is,	 therefore, a  return filed  within  the  prescribed
period and in such a case the assessment has to be completed
within a period of four years from the expiry of the year to
which the assessment relates. The return referred to in sub-
section (  1) of  section 14  of the  Act cannot be a return
filed beyond the prescribed date is emphasised by clause (i)
of sub-section	(3) of section 14 of the Act which refers to
a case	where a	 dealer liable	to pay	tax fails  to submit
return before  the date prescribed in that behalf. All cases
where the  return is  submitted beyond	the prescribed	date
fall under sub-section (3) of section 14 of the Act.
     The scheme of the Act regarding the period within which
assessments can be made is very simple. Assessments in cases
falling under  sub-section (1) of section 14 of the Act have
to be  completed within	 four years  from the  expiry of the
year to	 which the  assessment relates	and  assessments  in
cases falling under sub-section (3) of section 14 of the Act
may be	completed within  six years  from the  expiry of the
year to which the assessment relates. The two types of cases
which fall  under sub-section  (l) and	sub-section  (3)  of
section 14  of the  Act respectively are mutually exclusive.
When once  it is  established in  case that a return has not
been filed  within the	prescribed period  such	 case  falls
outside section	 14 ( l) of the Act and therefore the period
of  four  years	 prescribed  therein  becomes  automatically
inapplicable. It  clearly falls	 under clause  (i)  of	sub-
section (3)  of section	 14 of the Act and assessment can be
made in	 such a	 case within the expiry of the period of six
years.	While  a  dealer  who  files  a	 return	 within	 the
prescribed
743
period acquires immunity against assessment on the expiry of
four years  from the  last day	of the	assessment  year,  a
dealer who  fails to  file a  return within  the  prescribed
period has  to wait for six years to be over to acquire such
immunity. Thus	the Act	 confers a  distinct advantage	on a
dealer who is prompt in filing his return.
     We are  not impressed  by the  argument that  since the
returns in the cases before us had been accepted even though
they  had   been  filed	  beyond  the  prescribed  date	 the
assessments  made  thereon  cannot  be	considered  as	best
judgment assessment and therefore sub-section (3) of section
14 of  the Act	under which  it is  permissible to make best
judgment  assessments  would  be  inapplicable.	 The  period
within which  assessments can be made under the Act does not
depend	upon   the  answer   to	 the  question	whether	 the
assessment in  question is  a best judgment assessment or it
is an  assessment made	treating the  return as	 correct and
complete but  it depends upon the other conditions mentioned
in sub-section	( 1) and in sub-section (3) of section 14 of
the Act.  We may  here point out that even in a case falling
under subsection (1) of section 14 of the Act it is possible
for  the   assessing  authority	 to  make  a  best  judgment
assessment as  can be  seen from the latter part of the said
sub-section which  reads: "but	if the return appears to him
to be  incorrect or  incomplete he  shall after	 giving	 the
dealer a  reasonable opportunity  of proving the correctness
and completeness  of the  return submitted by him and making
such inquiry  as he  deems necessary,  assess to the best of
his judgment,  the amount  of tax  due from the dealer." Yet
such best  judgment assessment	has to be completed within a
period of  four years  from the	 expiry of the year to which
the assessment	relates. Hence it cannot be held that merely
because the  assessments in  question are  not best judgment
assessments sub-section	 (3) of	 section 14  of the  Act  is
inapplicable for  best judgment assessments can be made both
under sub-section  (1) and  subsection (3)  of section 14 of
the Act.  That the  assessment is a best judgment assessment
is not,	 therefore, decisive  of the  question	involved  in
these appeals.
     The decision  of the  Andhra Pradesh  High Court in the
State of  Andhra Pradesh  v. Pyarelal Malhotra 13 S.T.C. 946
and the	 decision of  this Court  in the  State of Madras v.
S.G. Jayaraj Nadar & Sons 28 S.T.C. 700 which dealt with the
question as to when a best judgment assessment could be made
are not relevant for purposes of deciding the question which
has arisen  before us.	As we  have already  pointed out the
question whether  the assessment  made is  the best judgment
assessment or not has no bearing at all on the period within
which an assess-
744
ment can  be made  under the Act. Neither in the judgment of
the High  Court against	 which Civil Appeal No. 4448 of 1985
is filed  nor in  the judgment	of the Tribunal out of which
Civil Appeal  No. 694  of 1986	arises adequate attention is
given to  the words  'before the  date	prescribed  in	that
behalf in clause (i) of sub-section (3) of section 14 of the
Act. The  High Court  and the Tribunal laid emphasis only on
the words  "fails to  submit return"  in the said sub-clause
and  it	  is  on  this	account	 they  arrived	at  a  wrong
conclusion.
     On a  true construction  of sub-section  (I)  and	sub-
section (3)  of section 14 of the Act we are of opinion that
where a	 return is  not filed  by a  dealer before  the date
prescribed in  that behalf  under  the	Act,  the  assessing
authority has  got jurisdiction	 to complete  the assessment
within a  period of six years from the expiry of the year to
which the assessment relates. Admittedly, in these cases the
returns were  not filed	 within the  prescribed date and the
assessments have  been made within six years from the expiry
of the	year to	 which the assessments relate. The orders of
the High  Court against	 which these appeals have been filed
are therefore  liable to  be set  aside. In Civil Appeal No.
4448 or 1985 the judgment of the High Court is set aside and
the judgment  of the  Tribunal is  restored. In Civil Appeal
No. 694 of 1986 the order of the High Court and the judgment
of the	tribunal are set aside and judgment of the Assistant
Commissioner  (CT)   Appeals,  Warangal	  is  restored.	 The
respondent shall  pay the costs of the Appellant in both the
appeals.
P.S.S.					   Appeals allowed.
745




