

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Mohd. Shafiq Khan & Ors. Etc vs Competent Authority & Ors. Etc on 27 November, 1987Equivalent citations: 1988 AIR  303, 1988 SCR  (2)	 95
Author: E Venkataramiah
Bench: Venkataramiah, E.S. (J)
           PETITIONER:
MOHD. SHAFIQ KHAN & ORS. ETC.,

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
COMPETENT AUTHORITY & ORS. ETC.

DATE OF JUDGMENT27/11/1987

BENCH:
VENKATARAMIAH, E.S. (J)
BENCH:
VENKATARAMIAH, E.S. (J)
SINGH, K.N. (J)

CITATION:
 1988 AIR  303		  1988 SCR  (2)	 95
 1988 SCC  (1) 267	  JT 1987 (4)	489
 1987 SCALE  (2)1224


ACT:
     Grant of  authorisation  certificate  under  U.P  Motor
Vehicles (Special  Provision) Act,  1976  for  plying  stage
carriage vehicles on notified routes.



HEADNOTE:
%
     The petitioners,  holders of  permanent stage  carriage
permits for  non-notified routes,  filed applications  under
the U.P.  Motor Vehicles  (Special Provision)  Act, 1976 for
the grant  of authorisation  certificate  for  plying  their
stage	 carriage     vehicles	  on	 Unnao-Kanpur	 and
Lucknow/Barabanki notified  routes.  The  applications	were
rejected. The petitioners moved the High Court for relief by
Writ Petitions. The High Court dismissed the writ petitions.
Aggrieved, the petitioners moved this Court by petitions for
special leave.
     Dismissing the petitions, the Court,
^
     HELD: The	schemes notifying  Unnao-Kanpur and Lucknow-
Barabanki routes  do not provides for and permit any private
operator to ply stage carriage vehicles on those routes. The
Regional Transport Authority has no power to grant any stage
carriage permit	 in respect  of a notified route. No private
operator is  entitled to  ply stage  carriage vehicles	on a
notified route	or a portion thereof unless authorised to do
so by  the terms of the scheme itself. If a private operator
had no	permit in respect of the notified route or a portion
thereof on  the date  of enforcement of the scheme. When the
route  is   nationalised,  he	is  not	  entitled  to	 any
authorization certificate.  Also, the  petitioners  are	 not
entitled  to-reply,   for   the	  purposes   of	  grant	  of
authorisation certificates  under section 5 of the 1976 Act,
on the stay orders issued by the High Court pending the writ
petition filed	by them,  under which  they had	 been plying
their vehicles on the notified routes. All those Stay orders
stood discharged  on the  dismissal of	the writ  petitions.
[97A;; C; G]
     Adarsh Travels  Bus Service and Anr. v. State of U.P. &
Ors.[1985] 4  SCC 557,	Hindustan Transport  Co. and Anr. v.
State of  U.P. &  Ors., [1984] Supp. SCC 22; and Sumer Chand
Sharma and Anr. v. State of U.P. and Anr., [1985] 3 SCC 263,
referred to.
96



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION. Special  Leave  Petition
(Civil) Nos. 8865-66 of 1987. etc.
     From the  Judgment and  order  dated  2.4.1987  of	 the
Allahabad High	Court in W.P. No. 2418/82 and WP No. 3293 of
1980.
     V.J. Francis for the Petitioners.
     The following order of the Court was delivered:
			    O R D E R
     The petitioners  held permanent  stage carriage permits
for non	 notified routes.  They	 made  applications  to	 the
competent authority  under the	U.P. Motor Vehicles (Special
Provision) Act,	 1976 for grant of authorisation certificate
permitting them	 to ply	 their stage  carriage	vehicles  on
Unnao-Kanpur  and  Lucknow-Barabanki  notified	routes.	 The
competent authority  rejected their applications, there-upon
they  filed   writ  petitions	under  Article	226  of	 the
Constitution challenging  the validity	of the	order of the
competent authority.  A Division  Bench of the High Court of
Allahabad (Lucknow  Bench) dismissed  the writ	petitions by
its order  dated 2.4.1987 on the ground that the petitioners
were not entitled to any authorisation certificate under the
U.P. Motor  Vehicles (Special Provision) Act 1976 as none of
them held permits for plying their vehicles on the aforesaid
notified routes	 on  the  date	the  routes  were  notified.
Aggrieved, the	petitioners have  filed these  special leave
petitions against the order of the High Court.
     After hearing  learned counsel  for the  petitioners we
are of	opinion that  there is	no merit in these petitions.
There is  no dispute that Unnao-Kanpur and Lucknow-Barabanki
are notified  routes and  the relevant schemes do not permit
any private operator to ply stage carriage vehicles on those
routes	or  any	 portion  thereof.  The	 Regional  Transport
Authority has no power to grant any stage carriage permit in
respect of  a notified route or any part thereof. No private
operator is  entitled to  ply stage  carriage vehicles	on a
notified route	of a portion thereof unless authorised to do
so by  the terms  of the scheme itself. A Constitution Bench
of this Court in Adarash Travels Bus Service & Anr. v. State
of U.P.	 & Ors.,  [1985] 4 SCC 557 made this position clear.
The Court  held that  no operator  is entitled to ply on any
portion of  a notified	route even  it the operator does not
pick up	 and set  down any  passengers	on  the	 overlapping
portions of a
97
notified  route.   The	schemes	 notifing  Unnao-Kanpur	 and
Lucknow-Barabanki do not provide for plying of vehicles of a
private operator  on those routes. No permit could therefore
be granted  to any  private operator  by extending  the non-
notified route,	 or by	including a portion of the aforesaid
notified  route	 in  his  permit.  The	competent  authority
constituted  under   the  U.P.	 Motor	 Vehicles   (Special
Provision)  Act	  1976	has  power  to	grant  authorisation
certificate to a private operator under Section S of the Act
permitting him	to  ply	 on  a	notified  route	 or  portion
thereof. This  Court has  held in  Hindustan Transport Co. &
Anr. v. State of U.P. & Ors., 119841 (Supp.) SCC 22 that the
competent authority  has jurisdiction to grant authorisation
certificate only  to those operators who held permit for the
route or  portion thereof  on  the  date  the  scheme  under
Chapter IV  A was  enforced. If	 a private  operator had  no
permit in respect of the notified route or a portion thereof
on the	date of	 the enforcement  of the  scheme, he  is not
entitled  to   any  authorisation  certificate.	 We  are  in
agreement with	the view  taken in Sumer Chand Sharma & Anr.
v. State of U.P. & Anr., [1986] 3 SCC 263. Since none of the
petitioners held permits in respect of the disputed notified
routes on the date the routes were nationalised they are not
entitled to grant of authorisation certificate.
     If any  proceeding is  taken or  writ petition is filed
challenging a  scheme of  nationalisation  by  the  existing
operators of  the route or portion thereof and if during the
pendency of  such  proceedings	or  writ  petition,  interim
orders are  granted permitting	the private operators to ply
their stage carriages on the route covered by the scheme, it
will not  confer any  right on the private operator to claim
authorisation certificate under Section 5 of the U.P. Act 27
of 1976 in the event of failure of challenge to the validity
of the	scheme or  dismissal of the writ petition. Section S
of  the	  U.P.	Act   27  of   1976  contemplates  grant  of
authorisation certificate  in favour  of an operator who may
have been  plying on  the notified  route or portion thereof
under a	 permit granted	 to him	 by the	 Regional  Transport
Authority or  the State	 Transport Authority  or Commission.
This benefit  cannot be	 extended to  an operator who may be
plying under  interim orders of a Court or authority without
there being  any permit	 in his	 favour. The petitioners had
been plying their vehicles on the notified routes under stay
orders issued by the High Court pending writ petitions filed
by them.  All those  stay orders  stood	 discharged  on	 the
dismissal of their writ petitions. Therefore petitioners are
not entitled  to rely  on these	 orders and on the fact that
they were running motor vehicles pursuant to the said orders
for the purposes of grant
98
of authorisation  certificate under  Section 5	of the	1976
Act. The  petitioners contend  that  they  are	entitled  to
obtain	authorisation	certificate   from   the   competent
authority under	 Section 5  of the Act as they had permit on
July 1,	 1976 the date on which the U.P. Act 27 of 1976 came
into force.  We find  no merit in this submission in view of
the decision of this Court in Sumer Chand's case (supra).
     The Special Leave Petitions are accordingly dismissed.
S.L.					Petitions dismissed.
99




