

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
State Of Haryana vs Dalmia Dadri Cement Ltd on 20 November, 1987Equivalent citations: JT 1988 (3)	 1
Author: S Mukharji
Bench: Mukharji, Sabyasachi (J)
           PETITIONER:
STATE OF HARYANA

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
DALMIA DADRI CEMENT LTD.

DATE OF JUDGMENT20/11/1987

BENCH:
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)
BENCH:
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)
RANGNATHAN, S.

CITATION:
 JT 1988 (3)	 1


ACT:
     Punjab General  Sales Tax	Act, 1948:  s. 5(2)(a) (iv)-
Cement-Sale of to Electricity Board for use in generation or
distribution of	 energy-Deduction  of  from  dealer's  gross
turnover-Whether permissible.
     Words  &	Phrases:  Expression  "for  use"  must	mean
"intended for  use"-s.5(2)(a)(iv), Punjab  General Sales Tax
Act, 1948.
     Section 5(2)(a)(iv)  of the  Punjab General  Sales	 Tax
Act, 1448  exempted goods  sold to any undertaking supplying
electric energy	 to public,  for use by it in the generation
or distribution of such energy.



HEADNOTE:
%
     The assessee-respondent  was sought to be reassessed to
sales tax,  in respect	of supply  of cement  to the  Punjab
State Electricity  Board in the years 1964-65 and 1965-66 on
the basis  of the  certificates issued	by the	Board to the
effect that  it was  required for  use in  the generation or
distribution of	 electrical energy, on the ground of nonuser
of the	goods for  the said  purpose. The Tribunal dismissed
the appeal of the assessee.
     On a  reference the  High Court  came to the conclusion
that the  assessee who	made sales to the Board on the basis
of the	certificates was  not required to prove further that
the cement was actually so used.
     Dismissing the State's appeal by Special leave,
^
     HELD: The	assessee-respondent is entitled to exemption
under s.  5(2)(a)(iv) of  the Punjab  General Sales Tax Act,
1948. [4G]
     The mere  fact that some of the cement supplied was, in
fact  used   by	 the  Punjab  State  Electricity  Board	 for
activities not	directly connected  with the  generation  or
distribution  of   electrical  energy,	 cannot	  make	 any
difference regarding the availability of the exemption. [4D-
E]
2
     In order to get exemption it need not be shown that the
goods in  question were	 actually used	in the generation or
distribution of electrical energy. On a plain reading of Cl.
(a)(iv) of  sub-s. (2)	of s.  5 of the Act it is clear that
the expression	"for use"  therein must	 mean "intended	 for
use". If  the intention	 of the legislature was to limit the
exemption only	to such	 goods sold as were actually used by
the  untertaking  in  the  generation  and  distribution  of
electrical energy,  the phraseology  used in  the  exemption
clause would  have been	 different, as,	 for example, "goods
actually used" or "good used". [4H; 5A-B]
     In the  instant case,  the certificates  issued by	 the
Board clearly  showed that  the intention  of the  Board was
that the  cement should	 be  used  for	a  purpose  directly
connected with	the generation or distribution of electrical
energy. There  is no  material to show that the certificates
were false  certificates given	by the Board, having another
use in	mind, or that they were fraudulently obtained by the
assessee in collusion with the Board. [5H; 6A-B]
     Associated Cement	Co. Ltd.  Kymore M.P.  v.  Assistant
Commissioner of	 Sales Tax, Jabalpur Region, Jabalpur & Anr;
[1971] 28  S.T.C. 629  and Spedding Dinga Singh & Co. v. The
Punjab State, [1968] 22 S.C.C. 319 distinguished.



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURlSDlCTlON: Civil  Appeal Nos 937-38
of 1975
     From the  Judgment and  order dated  4.11.1974  of	 the
Punjab and  Haryana High  Court in Govt. Sales Tax Reference
No 37 of 973
     Ravinder Bana and C.V. Subba Rao for the Appellants
     Serv Mitter and Madan Gopal Gupta for the Respondent.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     KANIA, J.	These appeals  by special leave are directed
against the  decision of  a Division Bench of the High Court
of Punjab  & Haryana  on a reference under Section 22 of the
Punjab General	Sales Tax  Act (hereinafter  referred to  as
'the Act  ). The  short facts  necessary for the disposal of
these appeal are as follows:
     The respondent-assessee  supplied cement  in the  years
1964-65
3
     and 1965-66  to  the  Punjab  State  Electricity  Board
     (referred to hereinafter as the Board') on the basis of
     the certificates issued by the Board to the effect that
     the cement	 was required  for use	in the generation or
     distribution  of	electrical  energy  In	the  initial
     assessment	 proceedings   on   the	  basis	  of   these
     certificates the sales of cement by the assessee to the
     Board were	 exempted. The	exemption was  granted under
     section 5(2)(a)(iv) of the Act.
     Section 5(2)(a)(iv) of the Act reads as under:
	  5(2).	 In   this  Act	  the  expression   'taxable
	  turnover' means  that part  of the  dealer's gross
	  turnover during  any period  which  remains  after
	  deducting therefrom-
	  (a) x x   xxxx   x
	       (i) xx xxx xxx xx
	       (ii) xx xxx xxx
	       (iii) x x x x
	       (iv)  Sales   to	 any  undertaking  supplying
		    electrical energy  to the public under a
		    licence or sanction granted or deemed to
		    have  been	 granted  under	 the  Indian
		    Electricity Act,  1910(IX  of  1910)  of
		    goods for use by it in the generation or
		    distribution of such energy; xxx".
     There is  no dispute  that the Board was an undertaking
supplying the  electrical energy  to the  public and that it
held a	licence or  a sanction	under the Indian Electricity
Act, 1910.  The assessing  authority on	 the basis.  Of	 the
certificates took  the view  that the cement was sold by the
assessee to  the Board	for use	 by it	in the generation or
distribution of electricity energy.
     Thereafter	 on  the  basis	 of  an	 audit	report,	 the
assessment was	re-opened by  the Deputy Excise and Taxation
Commissioner (Appeals).	 The Deputy Commissioner started suo
moto proceedings  under Section	 21 of	the Act and issued a
show cause  notice to  the  assessee  and,  after  giving  a
hearing to  the assessee, he came to the conclusion that the
exemption was  not attracted  and the  deductions which	 had
been granted  by the  original assessing  authority, to	 the
tune of Rs. 1 lac for the year 1964-65 and Rs.2 lacs for the
year 1965-66, had been
4
granted wrongly and issued additional demands aggregating to
Rs. 18,000.
     The assessee  challenged the  additional  demands	made
before the  Sales Tax Tribunal Haryana but the challenge was
replaced by  the Tribunal  and the  appeal of  the  assessee
dismissed
     Therafter a  reference was	 made by the Tribunal to the
Punjab & Haryana High Court under Section 22 of the Act. The
Division Bench	of the	High Court  while disposing  of	 the
reference came to the conclusion that on a true construction
of the	provisions of  Section 5(2)(a)(iv)  of the  Act	 the
assesee, who  made sales  to the  said Board on the basis of
the certificates that the cement was required for use in the
generation and	distribution of	 electrical energy,  is	 not
required to  prove further  that the  cement was actually so
used and,  on the  basis of  this conclusion  it decided the
reference in  favour of	 the assessee  It is  this  decision
which is challenged before us.
     The submission  of Mr  R Bana.  learned counsel for the
appellant is  that in  order  to  get  the  benefit  of	 the
exemption it  is required  that	 it  should  be	 established
before the  Tax Authorities  that the cement supplied by the
assessee was  actually used  by the  Board  in	an  activity
directly connected  with the  generation or  distribution of
electrical energy  In the  present case. the inquiry held by
the Deputy  Commissioner showed that the assessee was not in
a position  to establish such actual use by the Board and it
appeared that  a part of the cement supplied was used by the
Board in  the  construction  of	 staff	quarters  and  other
constructions  which  could  not  be  said  to	be  directly
connected with	the generation or distribution of electrical
energy .
     It was  on the  other hand	 submitted  by	the  learned
counsel for  the respondent  that there	 was nothing to show
that the  certificates issued  were  false  certificates  as
such. that is certificates given with the knowledge that the
cement purchased  was to  be used  partly in  activities not
directly connected  with the  generation or  distribution of
electrical energy  nor were the certificates obtained by the
assessee in  collusion	with  the  Board  The  assessee	 was
entitled to rely on the certificates and get the exemption
     We are  unable to	accept the  submission of  Mr.	Bana
that, in  order to  get the  exemption it must be shown that
the goods  in question	namely, the  cement supplied  by the
assessee in this case was
5
actually  used	 in  the   generation  or   distribution  of
electrical energy. It must be noted that the important words
used in	 the relevant provisions are "goods for use by it in
the generation	or distribution	 of such  energy"  (emphasis
supplied by  us). On  a plain reading of the relevant clause
it  is	clear  that  the  expression  "for  use"  must	mean
"intended for  use" If	the intention of the legislature was
to limit  the exemption	 only to  such goods  sold  as	were
actually used  by the  undertaking  in	the  generation	 and
distribution of	 electrical energy,  the phraseology used in
the exemption  clause would  have  been	 different  as,	 for
example, "goods actually used" or "goods used.".
     Mr. Bana,	in  support  of	 his  submission,  drew	 our
attention to  the decision  of	the  High  Court  of  Madhya
Pradesh in  Associated Cement  Co.  Ltd.,  Kymore,  M.P.  v.
Assistant  Commissioner	  of  Sales  Tax,  Jabalpur  Region,
Jabalpur and Another, [1971] 28 S.T.C. 629. In that case the
exemption provision  was in  pari materia with the exemption
provision before  us. It was held by the Madhya Pradesh High
Court that  everything sold to the Electricity Board for its
use  did   not	fall  within  the  exemption  under  Section
2(j)(a)(iii) of	 the Act.  It was only when there was direct
use of	the goods  in  the  generation	or  distribution  of
electrical energy  that the  goods sold	 to the	 Board could
fall within the exemption.
     We may  point out	that this  decision is	not  of	 any
assistance in the case before us as the dispute in that case
centered on  the question  whether, in	order to attract the
exemption, the	goods supplied	must be directly used in the
generation or  distribution of	electrical energy or whether
indirect use  of the  goods for	 the aforesaid	purpose	 was
enough. It  appears that  the Division	Bench which  decided
that case  did not  consider at all the question whether the
expression "for use" in the exemption clause meant "intended
for use"  or it	 meant "actually  used".  The  same  is	 the
position regarding  the decision of the High Court of Punjab
& Haryana  in Spedding Dinga Singh & Co. v The Punjab State,
[1968] 22  S.T.C. 319 which dealt with the very subclause in
question which	dealt with  the very  sub-clause in question
before us.
     We are,  therefore, of  the view that the real question
which we  are called  upon to  determine is  whether, in the
present case,  the cement  supplied  was  intended  for	 use
directly in  the generation  or distribution  of  electrical
energy. If  it was  so intended, the exemption was attracted
but not	 otherwise. The	 certificates which we have referred
to earlier  issued  by	the  Board  clearly  show  that	 the
intention of  the Board	 was that  the cement should be used
for a purpose directly
6
connected with	the generation or distribution of electrical
energy. There  is no  material to show that the certificates
were false  certificates given	by the Board, having another
use in	mind, or  that they were fradulently obtained by the
assessee in  collusion with  the Board.	 the mere  fact that
some of	 the cement supplied was, in fact, used by the Board
for activities not directly connected with the generation or
distribution of electrical energy cannot make any difference
regarding the availability of the exemption.
     In view  of the  conclusion set  out  in  the  previous
paragraph, we  do not  feel  called  upon  to  go  into	 the
question whether  certificates granted	by the Board must be
regarded as conclusive in a matter of granting exemption. We
may, however,  point out  that the  certificate contemplated
under Section 5(2)(a)(iv) of the Act cannot compare with the
certificate in Form 'C' which is a statutory certificate nor
can it	be regarded  as completely  conclusive. We  are	 not
called upon  in this  case to  consider in what circumstance
the assessing authority can go behind the certificate. It is
clear  that  in	 the  present  case  no	 such  circumstances
existed.
     In the  result, the appeals must fail and are dismissed
with costs.
P.S .S.					  Appeals dismissed.
7




