

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Mohammad Swalleh & Ors. V vs Iiird Addl. District Judge, ... on 4 November, 1987Equivalent citations: 1988 AIR   94, 1988 SCR  (1) 840
Author: S Mukharji
Bench: Mukharji, Sabyasachi (J)
           PETITIONER:
MOHAMMAD SWALLEH & ORS. v.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
IIIRD ADDL. DISTRICT JUDGE, MEERUT & ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT04/11/1987

BENCH:
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)
BENCH:
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)
OZA, G.L. (J)

CITATION:
 1988 AIR   94		  1988 SCR  (1) 840
 1988 SCC  (1)	40	  JT 1987 (4)	291
 1987 SCALE  (2)971


ACT:
     U. P.  Urban Buildings (Regulation of Letting, Rent and
Eviction) Act, 1972;s. 43(2)(rr) U.P. (Temporary) Control of
Rent and  Eviction Act,	 1947: s.  3-Permission for eviction
granted under  s. 3 of the old Act becoming final-First suit
dismissed on technical ground Application for eviction filed
under s. 43(2)(rr) of the new Act-Whether maintainable.
     Constitution of  India, Arts.  226 &  136:	 Absence  of
provision  in	Statute	 for   appeal-Erroneous	  order	  of
Prescribed  Authority	set   aside   by   District   Judge-
Jurisdiction of Court to interfere with.



HEADNOTE:
%
     Sub-section (1) of s. 3 of the U.P. (Temporary) Control
of Rent	 and Eviction  Act, 1947  barred suits	without	 the
permission of  the District  Magistrate against	 tenants for
eviction except	 on  the  grounds  mentioned  therein.	Sub-
section (2)  provided for  revision to the Commissioner, and
sub-section (4)	 made the  order of  the Commissioner final.
Section 7-F empowered the State Government to interfere with
such orders.  That  Act	 was  repealed	by  the	 U.P.  Urban
Buildings (Regulation  of Letting,  Rent and  Eviction) Act,
1972.
     Section 43(2)(rr)	of the	new Act, inserted therein by
U.P. Act  37 of	 1972, provided	 that where  any  permission
obtained under	s. 3  of the old Act had become final either
before the commencement of the Act or in accordance with the
provisions of  the sub-section after the commencement of the
Act, the  landlord may apply to the Prescribed Authority for
tenant's eviction.  This section was against amended in 1976
by insertion  of the  words "whether  or not  a suit for the
eviction of  the tenant	 has been instituted", and giving it
retrospective  operation.   The	 order	 of  the  Prescribed
Authority in such cases was made final.
     The landlord's  application under	s. 3 of the 1947 Act
for eviction  'of the  tenants-appellants was granted by the
Commissioner in	 April, 197I. The revision preferred by them
was rejected  by the  State Government in February, 1972 and
the permission became final. In pursuance
841
Of  the said  permission the  landlord	filed  a  suit	for
eviction of  the appellants.  Thereafter in 1973 he filed an
application for	 withdrawal of	the said  suit on the ground
that as	 the 1972  Act had  been amended,  he would  file an
application for enforcement of the permission.
     The Court	of Small  Causes found	that as the cause of
action on  which  the  suit  had  been	filed  was  rendered
infructuous, the  suit	was  liable  to	 be  dismissed.	 The
application filed  by the landlord under s. 43(2)(rr) of the
new Act	 for eviction of the appellants, was rejected by the
Prescribed Authority  on the  ground that  since  permission
obtained under	s. 3  of the old Act had been exhausted, the
application was	 not maintainable.  An appeal  against	that
order was allowed by the District Judge.
     In the  writ petition  filed by  the appellants-tenants
under Art. 226 of the Constitution it was contended that the
permission obtained  by the landlord having been utilised by
filing the suit, another proceeding on the basis of the said
permission could  not be  initiated, and  that no appeal lay
from  the  decision  of	 the  Prescribed  Authority  to	 the
District Judge.	 The High  Court held  that the landlord had
right to  file the second application. It took the view that
dismissal of  the first	 action taken  by the landlord after
obtaining permission  under the old Act did not preclude him
from taking the second action under s. 43(2)(rr) of the Act.
It further held that since the first suit was not decided on
merits subsequent action was not precluded.
     Dismissing the appeal by special leave,
^
     HELD: 1.  Section 43(2)(rr) of the U.P. Urban Buildings
(Regulation of	Letting, Rent  and Eviction) Act, 1972 as it
stood in  1973, permitted  a landlord to file an application
for the	 enforcement of the permission obtained by him under
s. 3  of the  1947 Act.	 After the  aforesaid provision	 was
amended in  1976, the  landlord was  not required  to file a
suit  to   avail  of   the  permission.	 The  amendment	 was
retrospective in operation. [844G-H]
     2. The  Prescribed Authority was in error in taking the
view that  as the  previous  suit  had	been  filed  by	 the
landlord on  the basis	of permission  and the same had been
dismissed, the	application under  s. 43(2)(rr)	 of the 1972
Act was	 not maintainable.  Such a  view would frustrate the
very purpose  of the  express provision of the section which
conferred a  right on a landlord who had obtained permission
under the old Act and has filed an application under the new
provision, to get the
842
tenant evicted. More so, when the permission granted had not
been exhausted because the suit was dismissed on a technical
plea and not on the merit of the contentions. [846C-D; 845C]
     Pahlad  Das  v.  Ganga  Saran  and	 Another,  AIR	1958
Allahabad 774, approved.
     3.1 Finality  of order in judicial proceeding is one of
the  essential	 principles  which   the   scheme   of	 the
administration of justice must strive for. [846D]
     D.K. Soni	v. P.K.	 Mukherjee &  Ors. C.A.	 No. 6626 of
1983 decided on October 27, 1987. referred to.
     3.2 In  the instant  case, through no appeal lay before
the District  Judge, the  High Court  came to the conclusion
that the  order of  the Prescribed Authority was invalid and
improper. On  that ground  it declined to interfere with the
order of  the District Judge in exercise of its jurisdiction
under Art.  226 of  the Constitution. Since justice has been
done by	 setting aside	the improper order of the Prescribed
Authority, no  exception can  be taken	to the	order of the
High Court.  There is,	therefore, no scope for interference
under Art. 136 of the Constitution. [847A-B]
     1 Shri Bhagwan and Anr. v. Ram Chand and Anr., [1965] 3
SCR 218, inapplicable.



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 2 107 of
1979.
     From the  Judgment and  order dated  22.9. 1978  of the
Allahabad High Court in C.M.W. No. 3857 of 1978.
     Gobinda  Mukhoty,	 Ali  Ahmad,  Mrs.  Jayshree  Ahmad,
Tanveer Ahmad, S S Hussain for the appellants.
     R.K. Garg and D.K. Garg for the Respondents.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     SABYASACHI MUKHARJI,  J. This  is a  tenant's appeal by
special leave.	After perusing	the  judgment  impugned	 and
grounds urged,	we are	of the	opinion, that  there  is  no
substance in this appeal
843
On merit,  though there	 are one  or two technical breaches.
This is	 certainly not a decision which should be interfered
with in	 the exercise  of jurisdiction	under Article 136 of
the Constitution  by this  Court. The appeal arises from the
judgment and  order dated  22nd September,  1978 of the High
Court of Allahabad The respondent No. 2 herein, Smt. Murtaza
Begum filed  an application  under  section  3	of  the	 U.P
Temporary) Control of Rent and Eviction Act, 1947 being U.P.
Act No.	 3 of  1947, hereinafter called the old Act, against
the appellants	Section 3  of the  said	 Act  provides	that
subject to  any order  passed under  sub-section (3) of that
section, no  suit  shall,  without  the	 permission  of	 the
District Magistrate be filed in any court against any tenant
for his	 eviction  from	 any  accommodation  except  on	 the
grounds mentioned  therein. Sub-section	 (2)  of  section  3
provided for  revision to the Commissioner against the order
of the	District Magistrate  Subsection	 (3)  of  section  3
empowered the Commissioner to hear the application and if he
was  not  satisfied  as	 to  the  correctness,	legality  or
propriety of  the order passed by the District Magistrate or
as to  regularity of  proceedings held	before him, alter or
reverse his  order or make such other order as might be just
and proper. By sub-section (4) of section 3 the order of the
Commissioner has  been made final subject to any other order
passed by  the State  Government under section 7 of the said
Act. Section  7-F  of  the  said  Act  empowered  the  State
Government to  call for	 the record  of any case granting or
refusing to  grant permission  for the	filing of a suit for
eviction referred  to and  authorised him to make such order
as appeared  to it  necessary for  the ends  of justice. The
application for	 eviction was granted by the Commissioner in
this case  on the  17th April,	1971. The appellants went in
revision to the State Government. The revision was, however,
rejected by  the State	Government on 7th February, 1972 The
permission thereafter became final.
     In	 pursuance   of	  the	aforesaid   permission	 the
respondent-landlord filed  a suit  being suit No 464 of 1972
in the	court of Judge, Small Causes, Meerut for eviction of
the appellants	Thereafter in  1973 the	 landlord  filed  an
application for withdrawal of the suit on the ground that as
U  P   Urban  Buildings	 (Regulation  of  Letting  Rent	 and
Eviction) Act  of 972 being U P Act no 3 of 972. hereinafter
called the  New Act,  had been	amended, he  would  file  an
application for	 the enforcement  of the permission obtained
under section  3 of  the old  Act. On  that application	 the
court found  that as  the cause	 of action on which the suit
had been filed was rendered infructuous, the suit was liable
to be  dismissed. After the suit was dismissed, the landlord
being respondent no 2 herein filed an application under
844
section 43(2)(rr)  of  the  New	 Act  for  eviction  of	 the
appellants from the premises in question. It was resisted on
the ground  that the  permission had  been dismissed and the
application under  section 43(2)(rr)  was not  maintainable.
The Prescribed	Authority upheld  the said  objection of the
appellants  and	  rejected  the	 application  filed  by	 the
landlord on the ground that since permission obtained by the
landlord under section 3 of the U.P. Act has been exhausted,
the application	 filed by the landlord was not maintainable.
It appears  to us  that the Prescribed Authority was clearly
in error  in so	 holding because  the permission granted had
not been  exhausted because  the  suit	as  dismissed  on  a
technical plea	and not	 on the	 merit	of  the	 contentions
Reference may be made to the observations in the decision of
the Allahabad  High Court in the case of Pahlad Das v. Ganga
Saran  and  Another,  AIR  1958	 Allahabad  774,  where	 the
division bench	of that	 court held that the obvious purpose
of the	permission under  section 3  of the  old Act  was to
enable the  plaintiff, the landlord to evict the tenant from
the premises  and as long as that purpose was not fulfilled,
the permission	could not  obviously exhaust itself Where it
was not	 shown that  the permission  was granted  to file  a
single suit  or that  it had  been specified  in it  that  a
second suit  could not	be filed,  the permission  could not
exhaust itself	simply because	the first  suit filed on its
basis  was  dismissed  on  some	 technical  ground  and	 the
permission obtained  could be  availed	of  for	 filing	 the
second suit.  In that  view, the  High	Court  affirmed	 the
previous decision of that court.
     It appears,  however, that	 an appeal was filed against
the order  of the  Prescribed Authority	 and the  appeal was
allowed by the order of the District Judge dated 28th April,
1978. Aggrieved	 thereby the  tenants filed  a writ petition
before the High Court. The controversy in the High Court was
whether the  application filed by the landlord under section
43(2)(rr) of  the New Act was not maintainable. The basis of
the claim  of the tenant was that as the permission had been
utilised by filing the suit, another proceeding on the basis
of the said permission could not be initiated The High Court
noted that section 43(2)(rr) was added by U.P. Act no. 37 of
1972. By  the addition of the new provision, the legislature
conferred a  right on a landlord who had obtained permission
under the  old Act  and had  filed an  application under new
provision to  get the  tenant evicted.	Section 43(2)(rr) of
the New	 Act was  again amended	 by the	 U.P. Act  No. 28 of
1976. By that amendment the words "whether or not a suit for
the  eviction  of  the	tenant	has  been  instituted"	were
inserted. The  amending Act  laid down that the amendment in
the  provision	 shall	be   deemed  to	  have	always	been
substituted. In	 other words, the amendment caused amendment
to be retrospective in operation.
845
     It is,  therefore, apparent  as the  High Court  in our
opinion in  the judgment  under	 appeal	 rightly  held	that
section 43(2)(rr)  i.e. in  1973 permitted  the landlord  to
file an	 application for  the enforcement  of the permission
obtained by  him. After the aforesaid provision was amended,
the landlord was not required to file a suit to avail of the
permission. The	 High Court  in the  judgment  under  appeal
rejected  the	contention  that  once	an  application	 for
permission had	been filed, the second application would not
lie. The  High Court  held that where the first suit was not
decided on  merits subsequent  action was not precluded. The
High Court  noted that	merits of the case were not examined
by the	Court. The Court in this appeal on this occasion did
not find  that the  permission obtained	 by the landlord was
invalid or  illegal. The  judgment of  dismissal was thus on
technical ground and not on merits. The High Court held that
the landlord  had right	 to file  the second application. In
our opinion,  the High	Court  was  right  for	the  reasons
mentioned hereinbefore.
     It is  next contended that since the suit was dismissed
on the	ground that  the cause	of action did not survive to
the landlord,  it should  be held  that the  landlord had no
right left  to file  an application under section 43(2)(rr).
This was,  in our  opinion, rightly  rejected  by  the	High
Court. The High Court negatived the contention of the tenant
that dismissal	of the	first action  taken by	the landlord
after obtaining	 permission under  the old Act precluded the
landlord  from	 taking	 the  second  action  under  section
43(2)(rr) of the Act.
     We are of the opinion that the High Court was right. It
will be appropriate at this stage to refer to the provisions
of section 43(2)(rr) or the New Act which are as follows:
	  "Where any  permission referred to in Section 3 of
	  the old  Act	has  been  obtained  on	 any  ground
	  specified in	subsection (1) or sub-section (2) of
	  Section 21,  and has	become final,  either before
	  the commencement  of this  Act, or  in  accordance
	  with the provisions of this sub-section, after the
	  commencement of  this Act,  (whether or not a suit
	  for  the   eviction  of   the	 tenant	  has	been
	  instituted),	the   landlord	may   apply  to	 the
	  prescribed  authority	  for  his   eviction  under
	  Section 21, and thereupon the prescribed authority
	  shall order  the eviction  of the  tenant from the
	  building  under  tenancy,  and  it  shall  not  be
	  necessary for	 the prescribed authority to satisfy
	  itself afresh as to the existence of any ground as
	  aforesaid, and such order shall be final and shall
846
	  not be open to appeal under Section 22:
	  Provided that	 no application	 under this  clause.
	  shall be maintainable on the basis of a permission
	  granted under Section 3 of the old Act, where such
	  permission became  final  more  than	three  years
	  before the commencement of the Act:
	  Provided further  that in  computing the period of
	  three years,	the time  during which the applicant
	  has been  prosecuting with due diligence any civil
	  proceeding whether in a court of first instance or
	  appeal or revision shall be excluded.
In view	 of the	 aforesaid, we	are of	the opinion that the
Prescribed Authority  was clearly  in error in upholding the
objection of  the tenant  that as the previous suit had been
filed by  the tenant on the basis of permission and the same
had been  dismissed, the application under section 43(2)(rr)
of the	Act 13 of 1972, was not maintainable. It was clearly
erroneous contention. It would frustrate the very purpose of
the express  provision of  section  43(2)(rr).	Finality  of
order  in  judicial  proceeding	 is  one  of  the  essential
principles  which   the	 scheme	 of  the  administration  of
justice,  must	strive	for.  See  in  this  connection	 the
observations of	 D.K Soni  v. P.K.  Mukherjee & Ors., (Civil
Appeal No. 6626/83 Judgment dated 27. 10. 1987).
     It was  contended before  the High Court that no appeal
lay from  the decision	of the	Prescribed Authority  to the
District Judge. The High Court accepted this contention. The
High Court finally held that though no appeal lay before the
District Judge,	 the order  of the  Prescribed Authority was
invalid and  was rightly set aside by the District Judge. On
that ground  the High  Court declined  to interfere with the
order of  the learned  District Judge. It is true that there
has been some technical breach because if there is no appeal
maintainable before  the  learned  District  Judge,  in	 the
appeal before  the learned  District Judge, the order of the
Prescribed Authority  could not	 be set	 aside. But the High
Court was  exercising its  jurisdiction under Article 226 of
the Constitution.  The High Court had come to the conclusion
that the  order of  the Prescribed Authority was invalid and
improper. The  High Court  itself could	 have set  it aside.
Therefore in the facts and circumstances of the case justice
has been done though, as mentioned hereinbefore, technically
the appellant  had a  point that  the order  of the District
Judge was illegal and improper. If we reiterate the order of
847
the High  Court as  it is  setting aside  the order  of	 the
Prescribed Authority  in exercise  of the jurisdiction under
Article 226  of the  Constitution then	no exception  can be
taken. As  mentioned hereinbefore, justice has been done and
as the	improper order	of the Prescribed Authority has been
set aside, on objection can be taken.
     In the  premises there  is no  scope  for	interference
under Article  136 of  the Constitution.  Our attention	 was
drawn to  certain observations of this Court about the power
of the	State Government under section 7-F of the old Act in
Shri Bhagwan  and Anr.	v. Ram Chand and Anr., [ 1965] 3 SCR
218. In	 the view,  we have taken of the facts of this case,
it is  not necessary  to deal  with  this  decision  in	 any
detail.
     In the  aforesaid view  of the matter, this appeal must
fail  and   is	accordingly  dismissed.	 In  the  facts	 and
circumstances of  the case,  we however, make no order as to
costs.
P.S.S.					   Appeal dismissed.
848

