

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Maharaja Pillai Lakshmi Ammal vs Maharaja Pillai Thillanayakom ... on 3 November, 1987Equivalent citations: 1988 SCR  (1) 780, 1988 SCC  (1)	 99
Author: K Shetty
Bench: Shetty, K.J. (J)
           PETITIONER:
MAHARAJA PILLAI LAKSHMI AMMAL

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
MAHARAJA PILLAI THILLANAYAKOM PILLAI AND ANOTHER

DATE OF JUDGMENT03/11/1987

BENCH:
SHETTY, K.J. (J)
BENCH:
SHETTY, K.J. (J)
RAY, B.C. (J)

CITATION:
 1988 SCR  (1) 780	  1988 SCC  (1)	 99
 JT 1987 (4)   281	  1987 SCALE  (2)933


ACT:
     Hindu Succession  Act, 1956 Right of widow to property-
Whether absolute  right under  section 14(1)  or  restricted
right under section 14(2) of the Act.



HEADNOTE:
%
     Under a  family partition	deed (Ex. 1), the properties
under 'A'  schedule were  allotted to  Maharaja Pillai,	 and
after his  death, his  widow was given the right to take the
income from the properties.
     One of  the  sons	of  Maharaja  Pillai  filed  a	suit
claiming his  right to	1/3rd share in the properties above-
said. The trial court held that the widow got absolute right
over the  properties in	 dispute under	section 14(1) of the
Hindu Succession  Act. On  appeal, the	appellate court held
that the  widow got  only a  restricted right  under section
14(2) of  the Act.  On further appeal, the High Court mainly
upheld the  view of  the first	appellate court. Against the
judgment of  the High  Court, appeal was filed to this Court
by special leave.
     Allowing the  appeal and  restoring the judgment of the
trial court, the Court,
^
     HELD: The	question to  be decided is whether the widow
got an	absolute  right	 or  a	restricted  right  over	 the
properties in  the 'A'	schedule after the coming into force
of the	Hindu  Succession  Act.	 During	 the  life  time  of
Maharaja Pillai,  his wife  (The  widow	 in  the  case)	 was
maintained by  him.  After  his	 death,	 the  widow  was  in
exclusive possession  of the 'A' schedule properties and was
taking the  income from those properties. She had a right to
utilise that  income for  her maintenance.  That  right	 was
conferred on her under Ex. D. 1. The properties possessed by
the widow  fairly and  squarely fall  under Section 14(1) of
the Act.  The property	mentioned in  section 14(1)  may  be
acquired by  a female  by inheritance  or  devise  or  at  a
partition  or	in  lieu   of  maintenance   or	 arrears  of
maintenance, etc. The right to maintenance of a Hindu female
is a  personal obligation of the husband. If the wife is put
in exclusive possession of property with the right to take
781
income for  her maintenance,  it must  be presumed  that the
property is  given  to	her  in	 lieu  of  maintenance.	 The
property under	'A' schedule  was allotted against the share
of  Maharaja   Pillai.	That   property	 was  given  to	 the
possession of  the widow with a right to take income for her
maintenance, and this is sufficient to get the protection of
section 14(1) of the Act. [782B; 783D-E; 784C-D; 786G]
     Gulwant Kaur  & Anr.  v. Mohinder	Singh &	 Ors., Civil
Appeal	No.   112  of  1980,  date  20.7.87;  Bai  Vajia  v.
Thakorbhai Chelabhai  & Ors.,  [19793 3 SCR 291; V. Tulsamma
v. Sesha Reddi, [1977] 3 SCR 261 at 310. referred to.



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Civil  Appeal No. 266 of
1974. C
     From the  Judgment and  order  dated  7.2.1973  of	 the
Kerala High Court in S.A. No. 763 of 1970.
     S. Padmanabhan and N. Sudhakaran for the Appellant.
     G. Vishwanatha  Iyer  and	Miss  Lily  Thomas  for	 the
Respondent N and 5.
     D.M. Nargolkar for the Respondent No. 1.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     JAGANNATHA SHETTY,	 J. This appeal by special leave has
been  preferred	  against  the	judgment  and  decree  dated
February 7,  1983 passed  by the  High Court  of  Kerala  in
Second Appeal No. 763 of 1970.
     Under the	family partition  deed	Ex.  1	executed  on
August 2,  1950, the  properties  under	 'A'  schedule	were
allotted to  Maharaja Pillai  and after	 his death his widow
was given the right to take the income therefrom. One of the
sons of	 Maharaja Pillai  filed a suit claiming his right to
take 1/3rd  share in those properties. The trial court while
construing the	terms of  Ex. 1	 held  that  the  widow	 got
absolute right	over 'A' schedule under section 14(1) of the
Hindu Succession  Act. The  appellate court, however, took a
different view.	 The appellate	court held  that  the  widow
could get only a restricted right under Section 14(2) of the
Hindu Succession  Act. Upon  further appeal,  the High Court
agreed with the view taken by the appellate court. The
782
High Court,  however, granted  a small	share to  the  widow
stating that  according to  law in  force in  the  erstwhile
Travancore State,  the widow  would have inherited the share
which would have fallen to any of the sons.
     The question for our consideration is whether the widow
got absolute  right or	only a restricted right over the 'A'
schedule after the coming into force of the Hindu Succession
Act. The  answer to  the question  turns upon  the scope and
meaning to  be given  to the  terms of	Ex. 1,	the relevant
portion of which is extracted hereunder:
	  "... 3.  As it  was decided by us to partition our
	  family   properties	 providing    to    maintain
	  Kothamachiyar Ammal,	who is the wife of executant
	  No. 1	 and mother  of	 others	 and  the  aforesaid
	  Lakshmi Ammal, this partition deed is written with
	  the stipulation  mentioned below  and it  is fully
	  agreed by  us to abide by the provisions contained
	  herein.
	  xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx
	  9. During  the life  time of	the 1st executant as
	  and when the marriage of the said Lakshmi Ammal is
	  decided  to	be  conducted  the  first  executant
	  himself shall	 meet the expense in connection with
	  that and  conduct her marriage and if her marriage
	  happened to  be conducted  after the	death of 1st
	  executant, executants	 Nos. 2	 and  3	 shall	have
	  right to encumber the 'A' schedule property for an
	  amount up  to	 Rs.2,	to  meet  the  expenses	 for
	  marriage  ceremonies	 and  for   dowry  and	gold
	  ornaments and	 the A schedule proper ties shall be
	  liable for  so much  amount. 10.  Kothamachi	kyar
	  Ammal, the  wife of  first executant and mother of
	  other	 executants   may  reside  in  the  building
	  included in  the A  Schedule during  her life time
	  and take  the income of the properties included in
	  the  A   schedule  after  the	 death	of  the	 1st
	  executant; after  the death  of the  1st executant
	  the successor-in-interest  of	 the  1st  executant
	  shall have no right to create any document, except
	  in  the   manner  stated  in	paragraphs  9  above
	  encumbering A	 schedule properties  so as  not  to
	  affect the  right of	enjoyment of the said person
	  but this  provision will not be binding on the 1st
	  executant as regards his absolute right over the A
	  schedule properties.
783
     The first	executant referred  to	above  was  Maharaja
Pillai. The  widow we  are concerned was his wife. On August
31, 1955  Maharaja Pillai  died.  There-after  'A'  schedule
items in the partition deed were being enjoyed by the widow.
While she  was in  possession of  those properties the Hindu
Succession Act	of 1956	 came into  force. Subsequently, the
widow had gifted those properties in favour of her daughter.
The case  of the  plaintiff was	 that  after  the  death  of
Maharaja Pillai,  the said properties would devolve upon his
heirs and  he would  be entitled to 1/3rd share. It has been
urged by  Mr.  Vishwanath  Iyer,  learned  counsel  for	 the
respondents that  the properties  in A schedule would remain
in possession  of the  widow with  the right  to utilise the
income therefrom for her maintenance but the properties were
not given  to her  in lieu of maintenance. It was also urged
that Maharaja Pillai had absolute power of disposal over the
properties during  his life  time, and it would be therefore
not proper to hold that the widow got the properties in lieu
of her maintenance.
     We are  unable to	agree with  these contentions. It is
not necessary  for us to examine what would have happened to
the rights  of the  wife if  Maharaja Pillai had disposed of
the 'A'	 schedule. The	fact remains that he did not. During
the life  time of  Maharaja Pillai, the wife was residing in
the house  allotted to her husband. She was being maintained
by her	husband. After	the death  of husband,	she  was  in
exclusive possession of the 'A' schedule. She was taking the
income from  those properties.	She had	 a right  to utilise
that income for her maintenance. That right was conferred on
her under  Ex. D1. The children also were, allotted separate
properties under  Ex. D1.  They had  taken their  respective
shares from  the  family  properties.  In  our	opinion	 the
properties possessed  by the  widow fairly and squarely fall
under Section  14(1) of the Hindu Succession Act. Section 14
provides:
	  " 1.	Any property  possessed by  a female  Hindu,
	  whether acquired  before or after the commencement
	  of this  Act, shall  be held	by her as full owner
	  thereof and not as a limited(l owner
	  Explanation-In   this	   sub-section,	  "Property"
	  includes  both   movable  and	 immovable  property
	  acquired by  a  female  Hindu	 by  inheritance  or
	  device  or   at  a   partition,  or	in  lieu  of
	  maintenance or  arrears of  maintenance or by gift
	  from	any  person,  whether  a  relative  or	not,
	  before, at  or after	her marriage  or by  her own
	  skill	 or   exertion,	 or   by  purchase   or	  by
	  prescription or any other manner what so
784
	  ever, and  also any  such property  held by her as
	  stridhan A  immediately before the commencement of
	  this Act.
	  (2) Nothing  contained in  sub-section  (1)  shall
	  apply to  any property  acquired by way of gift or
	  under a  will or  any other  instrument or under a
	  degree or order of a civil court or under an award
	  where	 the  terms  of	 the  gift,  will  or  other
	  instrument or the decree, order or award prescribe
	  "a restricted state in such property."
     The property  possessed by	 a female  referred to under
Section 14(1)  includes property both movable and immovable,
property.  It	may  be	  acquired  by	a  female  Hindu  by
inheritance or	devise or  at a	 partition  or	in  lieu  of
maintenance or	arrears of  maintenance etc. The deed or any
other arrangement by which the husband gives the property to
his wife for maintenance need not specifically state that it
is given in lieu of maintenance. It is not an act of charity
the husband  does. It  is out  of his personal obligation to
maintain her. The right to maintenance of a Hindu woman is a
personal obligation  of the husband. If, therefore, the wife
is put	in exclusive  possession of  the property  with	 the
right to  take the  income for	her maintenance,  it must be
presumed that  the property  is given  to  her	in  lieu  of
maintenance. The  very right to receive maintenance which is
inherent in her, is itself sufficient to enable the ripening
of possession  of any  property into  full  ownership  under
Section 14(1) of the Hindu Succession Act.
     It was, however, urged for the respondents that Section
14(1) does  not take  within its  fold every  property	that
comes into  possession. Of  the widow.	It must be a limited
estate in  the sense  of  ownership  without  the  right  of
disposal. It  should be	 a specific property given to her in
lieu of her right to maintenance.
     Similar contentions  have been  considered and rejected
in a recent decision of this Court in Gulwant Kaur & Anr. v.
Mohinder Singh	& Ors.,	 Civil Appeal  No. 112	of 1980 date
20.7.87 (to  which one	of us  was a  party,  K.  Jagannatha
Shetty, J. ) . There it was observed:
	  "It  is  obvious  that  Section  14  is  aimed  at
	  removing restriction no limitation on the right of
	  a female  Hindu to enjoy, as a full owner property
	  possessed by	her so	long as	 her  possession  is
	  traceable to	a lawful  origin, that is to say, if
	  she  has  a  vestige	of  a  title.  It  makes  no
	  difference whether  the property  is	acquired  by
	  inheritance or device or at a
785
	  partition or	in lieu of maintenance or arrears of
	  maintenance or  by gift  or by  her own  skill  or
	  exertion or  by pruchase  or by prescription or in
	  any  other   manner  whatsoever.  The	 explanation
	  expressly refers  to property	 acquired in lieu of
	  maintenance and  we do  not see what further title
	  the widow  is required to establish before she can
	  claim	 full	ownership  under  Section  14(1)  in
	  respect of  property given to her and possessed by
	  her in  lieu of  maintenance. The  very  right  to
	  receive maintenance  is sufficient title to enable
	  the ripening	of possession into full ownership if
	  she is  in possession	 of the	 property in lieu of
	  maintenance. Subsection  (2) of  Section 14  is in
	  the nature  of an  exception to  Section 14(1) and
	  provides  for	  a  situation	 where	property  is
	  acquired  by	 a  female  Hindu  under  a  written
	  instrument or a decree of court and not where such
	  acquisition  is   traceable  to   any	 antecedents
	  right."
     It was  urged that	 the view  taken in  above case	 was
contrary  to   the  decision  in  Bai  Vajia  v.  Thakorbhai
Chelabhai &  Ors., [1979]  3 SCR  291. We  do not agree with
this contention	 also. Indeed a similar contention was urged
in Gulwant Kaur's case and it was rejected by observing:
	  "We do  not understand  that court  as laying down
	  that what was enlarged by sub-section 1 of Section
	  14 into a full estate was the Hindu women's estate
	  known to  Hindu law.	When the Court uses the word
	  limited estate,  the words  are used	to connote a
	  right in  the property  to which the possession of
	  the female  Hindu may	 be legitimately traced, but
	  which is  not a  full right  of  ownership.  If  a
	  female Hindu	is put	in  possession	of  property
	  pursuant to  or  in  recognition  of	a  right  to
	  maintenance, it  cannot be  denied  that  she	 has
	  acquired  a  limited	right  or  interest  in	 the
	  property and	once that  position is	accepted  it
	  follows that	the  right  gets  enlarged  to	full
	  ownership under  Sec. 14(1) of the Act. That seems
	  to us	 to follow clearly from the language of Sec.
	  14(1) of the Act."
     Bai Vijia's  case, has  not  laid	down  any  different
principle. It  has expressly  accepted the  view taken in V.
Tulsamma v.  Sesha Reddi, [1977] 3 SCR 261 at 310 this Court
summarised the scope of Section 14 as follows:
786
	  "(1) The  Hindu female's  right to  maintenance is
	  not an  empty formality or an illusory claim being
	  conceded as  a matter of grace and generosity, but
	  is a	tangible right	against property which flows
	  from	the   spiritual	 relationship	between	 the
	  husband  and	 the  wife  and	 is  recognised	 and
	  enjoined by  pure Shastric  Hindu Law and has been
	  strongly stressed even by the earlier Hindu jurist
	  starting from	 Yajnavalkya to	 Manu. Such  a right
	  may not  be a	 right to property but it is a right
	  against property  and the  husband has  a personal
	  obligation to	 maintain his  wife and if he or the
	  family has property the female has the legal right
	  to be maintained therefrom. If a charge is created
	  for the  maintenance of  a female  the said  right
	  becomes a  legally enforceable  one. At  any rate,
	  even without a charge the claim for maintenance is
	  doubtless  a	 pre-existing  right   so  that	 any
	  transfer declaring  or recognising  such  a  right
	  does not  confer any new title but merely endorses
	  or confirms the pre existing rights.
	  (2) Section 14(1) and the Explanation thereto have
	  been couched	in the widest possible term and must
	  be liberally	construed in favour of the female so
	  as to	 advance the  object of 1956 Act and promote
	  the socio  economic ends  sought to be achieved by
	  this long need legislation.
	  (3) Sub-section (2) of S. 14 is in the nature of a
	  proviso  and	has  a	field  of  its	own  without
	  interfering  with   the  operation   of  S.  14(1)
	  materially. The proviso should not be construed in
	  a manner  so as  to destroy the effect of the main
	  provision or the protection granted by S. 14(1) or
	  in a way so as to become totally inconsistent with
	  the main provision.
	  XXX	    XXX	      XXX	XXX	  XXX
     In the  instant case  the property under A Schedule was
allotted against  the share  of Maharaja  Pillai.  The	same
property was  given to	the possession	of the	widow with a
right to  take the  income  for	 her  maintenance.  This  is
sufficient to  call into  aid Section  14(1)  of  the  Hindu
Succession Act.
     In the  result, we	 allow the  appeal,  set  aside	 the
judgment OF  the High  Court and  also the  lower  appellate
court and restore that of the trial court.
S.L					     Appeal allowed.
787




