

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Ajaib Singh vs Gurbax Singh & Ors on 17 November, 1987Equivalent citations: 1988 SCR  (1)1099, 1988 SCC  (1) 143
Author: S Mukharji
Bench: Mukharji, Sabyasachi (J)
           PETITIONER:
AJAIB SINGH

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
GURBAX SINGH & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT17/11/1987

BENCH:
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)
BENCH:
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)
OZA, G.L. (J)

CITATION:
 1988 SCR  (1)1099	  1988 SCC  (1) 143
 JT 1987 (4)   516	  1987 SCALE  (2)1045


ACT:
     Indian Contract  Act, 1872:  Agreement of sale-Specific
performance of-Major  portion of  sale price  paid by buyer-
Possession of  property with  buyer in	part performance  of
agreement-Documents of	title  not  executed-Limitation	 bar
pleaded-Held  High   Court   erred   in	  denying   specific
performance on	account of hardship without deciding whether
claim was barred by limitation.



HEADNOTE:
%
     Under an  agreement of sale entered into by respondents
the appellant had paid the major portion of the agreed price
long time ago and the balance thereof that was to be paid at
the time  of execution	of the documents was a sum of Rs. 75
only. Possession  of the premises was with the appellant for
all these years in part performance of the agreement.
     Upon failure of the respondents to execute documents of
title, the  appellant sought  specific	performance  of	 the
agreement.  The	  respondents  canvassed   the	question  of
limitation before  the High  Court. The High Court, however,
without deciding  that question	 took the  view that  due to
passage of  time prices of lands had gone up sky high and it
would be unjust to enforce the agreement of sale.
     Allowing the appeal by special leave,
^
     HELD: The	High Court  exercised  discretion  on  wrong
principles. Without  deciding the question whether the claim
of  the	 plaintiff  was	 barred	 by  limitation	 or  not  it
proceeded to  refuse to	 grant the relief on the ground that
there has  been good  deal of  delay and  the parties  would
suffer if specific performance of the agreement was granted.
This principle	was not	 applicable to the facts of the case
and the	 exercise of  discretion was  not proper. The matter
remanded to  the High  Court for decision in merits. [1100G;
E; 1101B]
     Madamsetty Satyanarayana  v. G.  Yellogi  Rao  &  Ors.,
[1965] 2 SCR 221; Dr. Jiwan Lal & Ors. v. Brij Mohan Mehra &
Anr., [1973]  2 SCR 230 and Debendra Nath Mandal v. Sakhilal
Kar & Ors., AIR 1950 Calcutta 526, referred to.
1100



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 3066 of
1987.
     From the  Judgment and  Order  dated  9.7.1986  of	 the
Punjab and Haryana High Court in R.S.A. No. 163 of 1978.
	  Mala	Ram  Ghana  and	 Dalveer  Bhandari  for	 the
Appellant.
	  M.S.	Gujral	 and  Dr.  Meera  Aggarwal  for	 the
Respondents.
	  The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
	  SABYASACHI MUKHARJI, J. Special leave granted.
     The High  Court in	 its judgment  and order  dated	 9th
July, 1986, has observed that the question of limitation has
been  canvassed	 before	 the  High  Court.  The	 High  Court
expressed the  view that there was a lot of conflict between
the various  High Courts on the interpretation of Article 54
of  the	  Limitation  Act   which  governed   the  point  of
limitation. The	 High Court,  however, did  not decide	this
question and  expressed the view that due to passage of time
prices of  lands had gone up sky-high and it would be unjust
to enforce  the agreement  of sale  entered into.  In  other
words, it appears that without deciding the question whether
the claim  of the plaintiff was barred by limitation or not,
the High Court exercised its discretion in refusing to grant
the relief  on the  ground that	 there has been good deal of
delay and  the parties	would suffer if specific performance
of the agreement was granted. It appears from the facts that
in this	 case the major portion of the agreed price had been
paid long time ago and the balance thereof was to be paid at
the time  of execution	of the documents was a sum of Rs. 75
only. It further appears that possession of the premises was
with the  appellant for	 all these years in part performance
of the agreement. In those circumstances, the principle upon
which the  High Court refused to exercise its discretion, in
our opinion,  was not applicable and such discretion was not
proper.	 The   High  Court  exercised  discretion  on  wrong
principles. See	 in this connection Madamsetty Satyanarayana
v. G.  Yellogi Rao & Two others, [1965] 2 SCR 221; Dr. Jiwan
Lal &  Ors. v.	Brij Mohan Mehra & Another, [1973] 2 SCR 230
and see	 also the  observation in  Debendra Nath  Mandal  v.
Sakhilal Kar & Ors., AIR 1950 Calcutta 526
     In that  view of  the matter,  we	cannot	sustain	 the
exercise of discretion in the manner done by the High Court.
This, however, does
1101
not decide  the matter because the High Court declined to go
into the  facts and  decide the	 question of  limitation  on
merits, the  High Court	 took the  view in  exercise of	 its
discretion. Since  we are  not sustaining  the High  Court's
exercise of  discretion hence  the order and the Judgment of
the High  Court are  set aside but the matter is remanded to
the High  Court for  its decision  on the merits. The matter
should be  disposed  of	 by  the  High	Court  as  early  as
possible. The appeal is accordingly allowed with no order as
to costs.
P.S.S.					     Appeal allowed.
1102




