

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Nirmal Kumar Choudhary & Ors. Etc vs State Of Bihar And Ors., Etc on 16 December, 1987Equivalent citations: 1988 AIR  394, 1988 SCR  (2) 410
Author: M Rangnath
Bench: Misra Rangnath
           PETITIONER:
NIRMAL KUMAR CHOUDHARY & ORS. ETC.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF BIHAR AND ORS., ETC.

DATE OF JUDGMENT16/12/1987

BENCH:
MISRA RANGNATH
BENCH:
MISRA RANGNATH
OZA, G.L. (J)

CITATION:
 1988 AIR  394		  1988 SCR  (2) 410
 1988 SCC  Supl.  107	  JT 1987 (4)	660
 1987 SCALE  (2)1385


ACT:
     Service  matter-Amalganation  of  different  cadres  of
employees and resultant gradation-Challenge thereto.



HEADNOTE:
%
     Civil Appeal  Nos. 2049  and 3129 of 1979 were filed in
this Court by special leave against the judgment of the High
Court in  a Writ  Petition filed  by respondents  6 to 51 of
Civil Appeal  No. 2049	of 1979.  One  appeal  was.  by	 the
employees and  the other,  by  the  State  of  Bihar,  etc.,
against the judgment of the High Court above-said.
     There were	 three different  wings of  Engineers in the
Department   of	  Agriculture,	 viz.,	 Irrigation,   minor
Irrigation and	River Valley  Projects. On  January 9, 1969,
the State Government amalgamated the cadres of engineers and
other employees	 of the	 Irrigation  and  the  River  Valley
departments. Engineers	and other  employees  of  the  minor
Irrigation wing were not amalgamated. Later, the Directorate
of minor  Irrigation was  made permanent  and a distinct and
permanent cadre of overseers termed as Junior Engineers, was
created. 191  permanent posts  of overseers were sanctioned.
Thereafter, the minor Irrigation - wing was also amalgamated
with the  other two  wings, and	 a combined  final gradation
list prepared on the basis of the status of the overseers as
obtaining on.January 9, 1969, was issued.
     On the  Writ Petition of the respondents 6 to 51 above-
mentioned, the	High Court  quashed the	 orders contained in
the various  annexures viz  11.11/1, 12, 13, 13/1, 15 and 16
directed the  State Government	to prepare  a fresh combined
gradation list	in accordance  with the principles laid down
by the High Court.
     Allowing the appeals in part, the Court,
^
     HELD: The	three wings  though under the administrative
control of the Agricultural Department, were separate before
amalgamation. Permanent	 posts had  been sanctioned  in	 the
minor Irrigation wing to
411
which the  petitioners before  the High	 Court belonged	 and
they were  appointed on	 permanent basis.  When	 integration
takes place and officers in different cadres are merged into
one, there  is bound  to be some difficulty in the matter of
adjustment. That  has occurred in this case. The approach of
the High  Court has  been that	if within  the cadre earlier
confirmation gives  seniority why  should that	basis be not
extended to  the combined  gradation list.  That may  not be
applicable in  every situation-particularly  when there is a
merger	of   cadres  and  the  combined	 gradation  list  is
proposed. [414C-D,FJ]
     Seniority would  ordinarily depend	 upon the  length of
service, subject, of course, to the rules holding the field.
This view has been taken by this Court in several cases. The
High Court  recorded a	finding that  there is no applicable
rule in	 the matter  of	 fixing	 inter	se  seniority  in  a
situation of  this type.  In the  absence of rules, the more
equitable way of preparing the combined gradation list would
be to  take the	 total length of service in the common cadre
as the	basis for  determining the  inter se  seniority	 The
Court does  not agree  with the High Court that confirmation
should be the basis and would substitute it by the length of
service test,  but the	Court upholds  the direction that in
fixing the combined gradation list the inter se seniority of
incumbents in  their respective	 departments  would  not  be
disturbed. The gradation list as published by the Government
has to	be modified.  The conclusion  of the High Court that
Annexures 11, 11/1, 12,13, 1311, 15 and 16 should be quashed
and a  fresh combined gradation list has to be published, is
confirmed. The	test  for  fixing  the	seniority  inter  se
generally,  is	altered,  but  the  direction  of  inter  se
seniority in  their  own  departments  to  be  respected  is
approved.  The	respondent-State  directed  to	prepare	 and
publish the  fresh combined  gradation	list  keeping  these
directions in view. [4t4G; 4t5C-F]
     A. Janardhana  v. Union of India and Ors., [1983] 2 SCR
936 and	 K.S. Vora  and Ors.  v. State of Gujarat and  Ors.,
[1987] 4 J.T. 179, referred to.



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Civil  Appeal Nos.	2049
and 3 128 of 1979.
     From the  Judgment and order dated 2.3.1979 of the High
Court f Patna in C.W.J.C. NO.1820 of 1977.
     Dr. Y.S.  Chitale, S.S.  Javali,  Narendra	 Prasad	 and
Ranjit Kumar for the Appellants.
412
     S.N. Kacker,  and L.N.  Sinha D.  Goburdhan, M.L. Verma
and A Dalip Tandon for the Respondents.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     RANGANATH MISRA,  J. These	 two appeals  are by special
leave. They  are directed  against the	same judgment of the
Patna High  Court in an application under Article 226 of the
Constitution filed  by respondents  6 to  51 of Civil Appeal
No. 2049  of  1979.  In	 the  Writ  Petition  the  aforesaid
respondents impleaded  the State of Bihar and certain public
officers as  also  all	others	who  were  included  in	 the
gradation list	for purposes  of seniority  in the  combined
cadre of  engineers in	the Department	of Agriculture.	 The
other appeal  is by  the  State	 of  Bihar  and	 its  public
officers and  both the	appeals challenge the correctness of
the decision  of the  Division Bench of the High Court. Both
the appeals are disposed of by this judgment.
     There were	 three different  wings of  engineers in the
Department of Agriculture being Irrigation, Minor Irrigation
and River  Valley Projects.  On 9th January, 1969, the State
Government amalgamated	the cadre  of  engineers  and  other
employees  of	the  Irrigation	  and	the   River   Valley
departments. Engineers	and other  employees  of  the  Minor
Irrigation wing	 were, however,	 not  amalgamated.  On	17th
November, 1969	the Directorate of Minor Irrigation was made
permanent and  the State  Government created  a distinct and
permanent cadre	 of overseers who came to be known as Junior
Engineers. 191 permanent posts of overseers were sanctioned.
Discussions were  held and committees were appointed for the
purpose of  merging the Minor Irrigation wing with the other
two wings  which had  already been  amalgamated in  1969. On
17th May, 1976, the Government ultimately approved the Minor
Irrigation wing	 to amalgamate.	 On 29th  August, 1977,	 the
Engineer-in-Chief   cum	   Special   Secretary,	  Irrigation
Department, circulated	a combined final gradation list said
to have	 been prepared, taking into consideration the status
of the	overseers as obtaining on 9th January, 1969. On 30th
June, 1978, an amended combined gradation list was published
which was  further changed on 18th July, 1978. Respondents 6
to S  1 had  already filed their writ application before the
Patna High  Court being	 C.W.J. Case  No. 1820 of 1977 which
the High  Court by  the impugned  judgment dated  2nd March,
1979 allowed. The High Court quashed the orders contained in
Annexures 11,  11/1, 12, 13, 13/1, 15 and 16 and called upon
the State  Government and  its officers	 to prepare  a fresh
combined gradation  list in  accordance with  the principles
laid down in the judgment.
413
     The High  Court referred to all the materials that were
placed before  it by the different parties and in para 17 of
the judgment came to the conclusion:
	       "From the discussion of the facts of the case
	  before us,  it is  clear that	 the petitioners got
	  their substantive  appointments earlier  than	 the
	  respondents concerned	 and if seniority would have
	  ranked on that consideration, then the petitioners
	  would have  ranked senior in the integrated cadre.
	  This was  also the recommendation of both the High
	  Powered  Committees	which  suggested   that	 two
	  seniority lists,  one for the permanent incumbents
	  and the  other for  the temporary  incumbents,  be
	  framed. No specific rule was brought to our notice
	  by either  side which could govern the case of the
	  petitioners and the respondents.
	       On the  other hand,  learned counsel  for the
	  petitioners  has   referred  to  the	instructions
	  issued by  the Personnel  Department of  the State
	  Government to	 all Principal Secretaries and Heads
	  of Departments  etc. in its memo No 3/RI-106/72-F-
	  15784 dated  the 26th	 August, 1972. Clause 3(vii)
	  thereof provides that in the event of amalgamation
	  of cadres  seniority is  determined with reference
	  to the date of appointment in the particular grade
	  on substantive  or continuous	 officiating  basis,
	  whichever is earlier, without. however, disturbing
	  the inter  se seniority of incumbents in any group
	  of posts as amongst themselves in that process. No
	  other rule  was brought to our notice on behalf of
	  either the learned counsel appearing for the State
	  or the contesting respondents.
An attempt  had been made before the High Court to rely upon
the executive instructions issued in a Government resolution
(Annexure 9). The High Court found that the circular had got
no application	to the	case before  it and  it	 related  to
secretariat assistants.	 The High  Court was not prepared to
act upon  it because  it was  not laying  down	any  general
principles. According to the High Court:
	       "Substantive appointment	 in a  service gives
	  the incumbent	 a right and if that cannot be taken
	  away	by   a	temporary   incumbent  of  the	same
	  department, we do not see why that right should be
	  allowed  to	be  taken  away	 if  a	question  of
	  integration or merger comes in by such incum-
414
	  bents who  were similarly  temporary	and  thereby
	  junior to the permanent employees. In our opinion.
	  therefore,  the   gradation  list   in  this	case
	  (Annexure  12)  is  violative	 of  the  principles
	  contained in	Articles 14  and 16  of the Constitu
	  tion and  impinges upon  the civil  rights of	 the
	  petitioners, making  them several  hundreds places
	  junior in  the integrated  or combined  cadre on a
	  basis which  cannot, in any view of the matter, be
	  said	to   be	 reasonable  in	 the  light  of	 the
	  principles	discussed     in    the	   aforesaid
	  authorities."
It is  not in dispute that the three wings, though under the
administrative control	of the Agricultural Department, were
separate  before   amalgamation.  As  already  pointed	out,
permanent posts	 had been sanctioned in the Minor irrigation
wing to which the petitioners before the High Court belonged
and they were appointed on permanent basis. The High Powered
Committees had	taken all aspects into consideration and had
recommended relevant  aspects to be kept in view to regulate
seniority in  the merged cadre. When integration takes place
and officers  in different cadres are merged into one, there
is bound  to be some difficulty in the matter of adjustment.
That obviously	has occurred  here. The High Court has found
that the  petitioners before  it had  held, on	the basis of
confirmation, permanent	 posts and  on that  basis  directed
that the  combined seniority  list should be prepared taking
dates of  substantive appointments  as the  basis for fixing
inter  se  seniority.  That  indeed  might  create  problems
because depending  upon availability of opportunities in the
different wings, confirmation may have been granted while in
the absence  of the same, though officers in the other wings
may be senior they may not have been confirmed. The approach
of the	High Court  has been, as extracted above by us, that
if within the cadre earlier confirmation gives seniority why
should that  basis be not extended to the combined gradation
list.  This  may  not  be  applicable  in  every  situation-
particularly when  there is  a	merger	of  cadres  and	 the
combined gradation list is proposed.
     It is  a well-settled  position in	 law that  seniority
would ordinarily  depend upon  length of service subject, of
course, to rules holding the field. That view has been taken
by this	 Court in  several cases  and it  is unnecessary  to
refer to  all of  them. In A. Janardhana v. Union of India &
Ors., [1983]  2 SCR  936 the situation was somewhat the same
as here.  The Court found that the method adopted for fixing
seniority  overlooked  the  character  of  appointments	 and
pushed down  persons validly  appointed below others who had
no justification  to be	 given higher  place. At page 960 of
the Reports, the Court observed:
415
	       "It is  an equally  well recognised  canon of
	  service jurisprudence	 that in  the absence of any
	  other	 valid	 rule  for   determining  inter	  se
	  seniority  of	  members  belonging   to  the	same
	  service, the rule of continuous officiation or the
	  length of  service or	 the  date  of	entering  in
	  service  and	 continuous  uninterrupted   service
	  thereafter would  be valid  and would	 satisfy the
	  tests of Article 16."
We may also refer to a very recent decision of this Court in
K.S. Vora  & ors.  v. State  of Gujarat	 &  Ors.,  [1987]  4
Judgment Today	179. The  High Court recorded a finding that
there is no applicable rule in the matter of fixing inter se
seniority in  a situation  of this  type. In  the absence of
rules, the  more equitable  way of  preparing  the  combined
gradation list	would be to take the total length of service
in the	common grade  as the  basis for determining inter se
seniority. We  would like  to add  that	 in  regard  to	 the
Supervisors (now  called Junior	 Engineers) serving  in	 the
three wings there is no dispute of the grade being the same.
While we  do not agree with the High Court that confirmation
should be the basis and would substitute it by the length of
service test,  we would	 uphold the direction that in fixing
the combined  gradation list  the inter	 se seniority of the
incumbents in  their respective	 departments  would  not  be
disturbed. Even	 if this  be the test, the gradation list as
published  by  Government  has	to  be	modified.  We  would
accordingly confirm  the conclusion  of the  High Court that
Annexures 1  1, 11/1,  12, 13,	13/1, 15  and 16  should  be
quashed and  a fresh  combined	gradation  list	 has  to  be
published. We have altered the lest for fixing the seniority
inter se  generally but	 we have  approved the	direction of
inter se seniority in their own departments to be respected.
The  respondent-State  and  its	 officers  are	directed  to
prepare	 and  pubIish  the  fresh  combined  gradation	list
keeping the aforesaid directions in view.
     Both the  appeals are  allowed to	the extent indicated
above. Parties shall bear their own costs throughout.
S.L.					    Appeals allowed.
416




