

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Commlssloner Of Gift Tax, Gujarat vs Executors & Trustees Of The Estate ... on 11 December, 1987Equivalent citations: 1988 AIR  522, 1988 SCR  (2) 341
Author: M Venkatachalliah
Bench: Venkatachalliah, M.N. (J)
           PETITIONER:
COMMlSSlONER OF GIFT TAX, GUJARAT

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
EXECUTORS & TRUSTEES OF THE ESTATE OFLATE SH. AMBALAL SARABH

DATE OF JUDGMENT11/12/1987

BENCH:
VENKATACHALLIAH, M.N. (J)
BENCH:
VENKATACHALLIAH, M.N. (J)
NATRAJAN, S. (J)

CITATION:
 1988 AIR  522		  1988 SCR  (2) 341
 1988 SCC  Supl.  115


ACT:
     Gift Tax  Act,  1958:  Section  15(3)-Gift	 of  shares-
Correct-Principles of  valuation-Whether a  question of law-
Shares not  quoted on  stock exchange-What  is the method of
valuation applicable to.



HEADNOTE:
%
     The assessee  contended  in  the  gift  tax  assessment
proceedings that  the 480  shares  in  the  English  Company
acquired as gift were not quoted in the stock exchange, that
their value  be determined  on the  average  break-up  value
indicated by  the  balance  sheets  of	the  Company  as  on
31.3.1964 and 31.3.1965, and that in view of the decision of
the General  Body of the Company dated 4.10.1961 to increase
its share capital by issue of additional shares the value of
the shares  constituting the  subject matter  of  the  gifts
which were transferred "ex-right" would stand depreciated.
     The Gift  Tax officer valued the shares on the basis of
the breakup  value yielded by and deducible from the balance
sheet as  on 31.3.1964. The Appellate Assistant Commissioner
dismissed the assessee's appeal.
     In the  further appeal  before the Income-tax Appellate
Tribunal, the  Tribunal, relying  on the  ratio laid down in
the English  Case, Lynall  and another,	 v.  Inland  Revenue
Commissioner, 83  I.T.R. 563  valued the  shares  at  Rs.450
each, said  to represent  the break-up value on the basis of
the balance  sheet of  31.3.1963, holding  that it could not
take  into  consideration  any	other  document	 except	 the
published  information,	 which	was  the  aforesaid  balance
sheet.
     The Tribunal  stated a  case and referred the matter to
the High  Court, for  its opinion.  The High Court held that
since the  only information  which was available on the date
of the	gifts was  in the  form of  the balance	 sheet as of
March 31,  1963, the  Tribunal was  right in taking the same
into consideration, for the purpose of arriving at the value
of the shares by the 'break-up' method.
342
     In the  appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf
of the	Revenue that  the principle of valuation relied upon
by the	High Court  was erroneous,  and that  the  case	 was
covered by  the decisions  of this  Court in Commissioner of
Wealth Tax,  Assam v.  Mahadeo Jalan  & Ors.,86	 ITR 621 and
Commissioner  of   Gift-Tax,  Bombay   v.  Smt.	 Kusumben  .
Mahadevia, 122 ITR 38.
     On behalf	of the assessee it was urged that in view of
the consensus  between	the  parties  as  to  the  basis  of
valuation, it  was not	now open  to the Revenue to urge the
application of an altogether different principle.
     Disposing of the appeal,
^
     HELD:1. The  correct principle  of valuation applicable
to a  given case is a question of law. The parties can agree
upon a	principle permissible  and recognised by law. If two
or  more   alternative	principles  arc	 equally  valid	 and
available it  might be	permissible for the parties to agree
upon one of the alternative modes of valuation in preference
to another. [346G-H]
     In the  instant case,  the Revenue	 cannot be precluded
from urging the correct legal position. [347A]
     2. When  the shares in a public limited company are not
quoted on  the stock  exchange. Or  are in a private limited
company the  proper method  of valuation to be adopted would
be the profit earning method.[346B-C]
     Commissioner of  Gift- Tax,  Bombay v. Smt. Kusumben D.
Mahadevia, 122 ITR 38, relied upon.
     Commissioner of  Wealth Tax,  Assam v. Mahadeo Jalan .&
Ors., 86,  ITR 621  and, Williams J in Mc. Cathie v. Federal
Commissioner of Taxation, 69 C.L.R. 1, referred to.
     In the  instant case,  the view of the High Court as to
the principle  of valuation  in determining the value of the
kinds of shares concerned cannot be held to be correct. As a
logical consequence,  the Tribunal would have to go through,
over again,  the exercise  of determination  of the value of
the shares  adopting  the  correct  principle.	But,  having
regard to the fact that the matter is already two and a half
decades old, and that the magnitude of the mechanism for the
re-fixation of	the value  of  the  gifts  by  adopting	 the
somewhat intricate process inherent in the
343
"profit method"	 of valuation,	and the	 difference  in	 the
quantum	 of  tax  that	might  result  in,  do	not  bear  a
reasonable or  senible proportion,  the	 valuation  is	left
undisturbed.[347A-D]



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL. APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Civil  Appeal  No.	 982
(NT) of 1975.
     From the  Judgment and  order dated  10.10.1974 of	 the
Gujarat High Court in Gift Tax Reference No. 1 of 1973.
     Dr. V. Gauri Shanker, K.C. Dua, C.V. Subha Rao and Miss
A. Subhashini for the Appellant.
     T.A. Ramachandran,	 Sonet P.  Mehta. D.N. Misra and Ms.
Sunita Narhari for the Respondent.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     VENKATACHALIAH, J.	 This appeal, by certificate, by the
Commissioner of	 Income-Tax, Gujarat,  directed against	 the
order dated,  10.10.1974 of  the Gujarat  High Court in Gift
Tax Ref.  No. 1	 of 1973  raises  a  question  touching	 the
correct	 principles   of   valuation   of   certain   shares
constituting the subject-matter of a gift, held in a company
incorporated in	 the United  Kingdom analogous	to a private
limited company in India.
     2. Shri  Ambalal Sarabhai,	 since	deceased,  held	 480
shares in  an English  Company M/s. Bakubhai & Ambalal Ltd.,
London, the  share-capital of which consisted of 2000 shares
of   10 each. On 17.10.1964, under eight deeds of gift, the
said Ambalal  Sarabhai made  gifts of the said 480 shares to
certain members	 of his	 family. In  the proceedings  of the
assessment to gift-tax respecting said gifts the question of
the proper basis for determination of the value of the gifts
having arisen,	the assessee  contended that,  as the shares
were not  quoted  in  the  stock-exchange,  their  value  be
determined on the average of break-up value indicated by the
balance-sheets of the Company as on 31.3.1964 and 31.3.1965.
The former  figure was	Rs.507 and  the	 latter	 Rs.333	 per
share; the average of the two being Rs.420 per share.
     The  assessee  also  contended  that  in  view  of	 the
decision  of   the  General  Body  of  the  company,  dated,
4.10.1961  to	increase  its	share-capital  by  issue  of
additional 2000 shares at  10 each, the value of the shares
constituting the  subject-matter of  the  gifts	 which	were
transferred "ex-right" would stand depreciated.
344
     The Gift  Tax Officer did not accept the contentions of
the asses  see. He  proceeded to  value the shares at Rs.507
per share  on the basis of the break-up value yielded by and
deducible  from	 the  balance-sheet  as	 on  31.3.1964.	 The
Appellate Assistant  Commissioner dismissed  the  assessee's
appeal.	 In   the  further  appeal  before  the	 Income	 Tax
Appellate late	Tribunal, the  Tribunal, placing reliance on
what  it  considered  to  be  the  principles  of  valuation
appropriate to	such cases  said to  be contained in Lynal &
Anr. v.	 I.R. C.  (H.L.), (83 ITR 563), valued the shares at
Rs.450 each  said to  represent the  break-up value  on	 the
basis of  the balance-sheet  of 31.3.1963. The Tribunal held
that it could not take into consideration any other document
except the  published in  formation which, in this case, was
the balance-sheet as on 31.3.1963.
      3.  The Tribunal,	 at the instance of both the revenue
and the	 assessee stated a case and referred three questions
of law	for the	 opinion of  the High Court-the first two at
the instance of the revenue and the third at the instance of
the assessee.  The assessee,  it must  be observed  did	 not
press the  question referred  at his  instance and  the High
Court, accordingly,  did not  express any opinion on it. The
two questions  referred for the opinion of the High Court at
the instance of the Revenue were:
	  "(1) Whether	on the facts and in circumstances of
	       the case.  the finding  of the Tribunal based
	       on the ratio of the case decided by the House
	       of Lords	 in Lynall  and	 Another  v.  Inland
	       Revenue Commissioner,  (83  l.T.R.  563)	 and
	       basing  the   valuation	of   the  shares  of
	       Bakubhai and  Ambalal Ltd.,  London,  on	 its
	       balance	sheet	as  at	31.3.63	 instead  of
	       31.3.64 is bad in law?
	  (2)  Whether on the facts and in the circumstances
	       of the case, the Tribunal was right in law in
	       accepting the  valuation	 of  the  shares  as
	       returned	 by   the  assessee   and   deleting
	       Rs.27,360 added by the Gift-Tax officer under
	       Section 15(3) of the Act?"
     The High Court by its order, now under appeal, answered
the questions against the revenue. It held:
	  "The only  information which	was available  as on
	  October, 17,	1964 was in the form of the balance-
	  sheet as  of March 31, 1963 and hence the Tribunal
	  was right  when it took into consideration for the
	  purpose of arriving at the value of the
345
	  shares by  the break-up  method, the balance sheet
	  as at	 March 31,  1963 and  not as the revenue was
	  contending for  the balance  sheet as of March 31.
	  1964."
     4. Dr.  Gauri Shanker,  Learned Senior Counsel urged in
support of the appeal, that the entire exercise of valuation
before the  High  Court	 rested	 on  a	case  which  had  no
application to	the  matter;  that  the	 case  was  governed
squarely by the pronouncements of this Court in Commissioner
of Wealth  Tax, Assam  v. Mahadeo  Jalan & Ors.,(86 ITR 621)
and, more  particularly, in Commissioner of Gift-tax, Bombay
v. Smt.	 Kusumben D.  Mahadevia, (  122 ITR 38) and that the
erroneous view	of the	High Court  as to  the principles of
valuation should, therefore, not remain uncorrected.
     5. Shri  Ramchandran, learned  senior counsel  for	 the
assessee, in  the. light  of the aforesaid pronouncements to
this court,  found it difficult to support the principles on
which the determination of the value of the shares proceeded
before the  authorities as  well as  before the Tribunal and
the igh	 Court. He,  however, invited  our attention  to the
following observations of the High Court:
	  " ..	As a  matter of	 fact it  may be pointed out
	  that before the Tribunal it was common ground that
	  the value  of the  shares should be ascertained by
	  following the	 break-up value	 method and the only
	  difference was  as to	 with reference	 to  balance
	  sheet of  what date  the total value of the assets
	  has to be ascertained ......
and urged  that in view of the consensus between the parties
as to  the basis  of valuation	it was	not now	 open to the
Revenue to  turn around	 and  urge  the	 application  of  an
altogether different principle.
     6. We  are afraid,	 the basis adopted by the High Court
is clearly  unsustainable in the light of the pronouncements
of this	 court referred	 to earlier.  The reference  to	 and
reliance upon  the Lynall principle was somewhat in-apposite
and  misplaced.	  That	case   principally  dealt  with	 the
impermissibility  of   reliance	 on  classified	 information
considered  confidential  and  privileged  from	 disclosure.
Pointing out  the inadequacy  of the "break-up-value" method
this court in Mahadeo Jalan's case referred with approval to
the following  observations of	Williams J  in Mc. Cathie v.
Federal Commissioner's of Taxation (69 C.L.R. 1):
	  " .. the real value of the shares .. will depend
346
	  more on  the profits	which the  company has	been
	  making and  should be	 capable of  making,  having
	  regard to the nature of its business than upon the
	  amounts  which  the  shares  would  be  likely  to
	  realise upon liquidation .....
In Kusumben's  case referring to the principles of valuation
relevant to the matter, this court said:
	  "..... But  where the	 shares in  a public limited
	  company are  not quoted  on the  stock exchange or
	  the shares  are in  a private-limited	 company the
	  proper method	 of valuation to be adopted would be
	  the profit  earning method.  This  method  may  he
	  applied by  taking the dividends as reflecting the
	  profit earning capacity of the company on a reason
	  able commercial  basis but if it is found that the
	  dividends do	not  correctly	reflect	 the  profit
	  earning capacity  because only  a small proportion
	  of the  profits is distributed by way of dividends
	  and a	 large amount  of profits  is systematically
	  accumulated in  the form of reserves, the dividend
	  method  of  valuation	 may  be  rejected  and	 the
	  valuation may be made by reference to the profits.
	  The profit-earning  method takes  into account the
	  profits which	 the company  has  been	 making	 and
	  should be  capable of	 making and  the  valuation,
	  according to	this method  is based on the average
	  maintainable profits.	 Of course,  for the purpose
	  of such  valuation, the  taxing authority  is	 not
	  bound by the figure of profits shown in the profit
	  and loss  account because  it is possible that the
	  amount of  profits may have suffered diminution on
	  account  of	unreasonable  expenditure   or	 the
	  directors having chosen to take away a part of the
	  profits in  the form	of remuneration	 rather than
	  dividends. The  figure of  profits in	 such a case
	  would have  to be  adjusted in  order to arrive at
	  the real profit earning capacity of the company
	  ....."
     The view  of the  High Court cannot, therefore, be said
to reflect the position in law correctly.
      7.  The correct principle of valuation applicable to a
given case  Is a question of law. The parties can agree upon
a principle  permissible under and recognised by law. If two
or  more   alternative	principles   ar	 equally  valid	 and
available, it  might be permissible for the parties to agree
upon one of the alternative modes of valuation in preference
to
347
another. In  this case,	 the revenue  cannot be	 said to  be
precluded from	urging the  correct legal  position. In	 the
ultimate analysis,  it requires	 to be held that the view of
the  High   Court  as  to  the	principle  of  valuation  in
determining the	 value of  the kind  of shares	concerned in
this case  cannot be  held to be correct. The first question
of law	referred for its opinion would otherwise, require to
be answered  in	 the  affirmative  and	the  second  in	 the
negative;  both	  against  the	 assessee.  As	 a   logical
consequence, the  Tribunal would  have to  go through,	over
again, the  exercise of	 determination of  the value  of the
shares adopting the correct principle.
     8. But  the matter	 is already  two and  a half decades
old. The  gift was  in the  year 1964. The total Gift-Tax as
now assessed  is Rs.5661.  Upon a fresh determination of the
value  of   the	 shares	  adopting  the	 somewhat  intricate
processes inherent  in the  'profit-method' of valuation the
difference in  the quantum of the tax might, perhaps, not be
substantial. The  magnitude of	the mechanism for refixation
of the	value of the gifts and the difference in the quantum
of the	tax it	might result-in, do not bear a reasonable or
sensible  proportion.	Having	regard	 to  the   pecuniary
involvement in the case which is obviously small we think we
should	not   expose  the   parties  to	 a  fresh  round  of
litigation.
     In this  view of  the matter, we think appellant should
be content  with the  declaration of  the law on the matter,
without disturbing  the valuation  made by  the Tribunal and
approved by  the High Court. though the principle adopted is
not supportable in law. We therefore decline to interfere in
the matter. The valuation is therefore left undisturbed .
     9. The  appeal  is	 disposed  of  accordingly.  In	 the
circumstances of  the case,  there will	 be no	order as  to
costs.
N.P.V.					 Appeal disposed of.
348




