

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Biswanath Ghosh vs State Of West Bengal & Ors on 16 February, 1987Equivalent citations: 1987 AIR 1155, 1987 SCR  (2) 305
Author: A Sen
Bench: Sen, A.P. (J)
           PETITIONER:
BISWANATH GHOSH

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF WEST BENGAL & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT16/02/1987

BENCH:
SEN, A.P. (J)
BENCH:
SEN, A.P. (J)
ERADI, V. BALAKRISHNA (J)

CITATION:
 1987 AIR 1155		  1987 SCR  (2) 305
 1987 SCC  (2)	55	  JT 1987 (1)	555
 1987 SCALE  (1)435


ACT:
    Constitution  of India, 1950, Article  136--Interference
by Supreme Court with an order of acquittal recorded by	 the
High Court at the instance of a private complaint, permissi-
bility.
    Code   of	Criminal  Procedure,  1973,   section	385,
scope--Appeal disposed of in the absence of the records from
the  Sessions Judge and when even notices for the  grant  of
bail were not issued. solely relying on the concession	made
by the Public Prosecutor as to the discrepancy in the number
of injuries found on the deceased and the witnesses' deposi-
tion is vitiated and bad in law.



HEADNOTE:
    Respondents	 2 to 9 preferred an appeal to the  Calcutta
High Court against their conviction and sentence dated 19.3.
1984.  On  22.3.  1984 a Division Bench of  the	 High  Court
admitted  the  appeal but did not grant bail on	 that  date.
Within	a  fortnight  thereafter, i.e. on  12.4.  1984,	 the
application for bail moved by the Respondents came up before
the  Bench  for consideration. The appeal was  not  set	 for
hearing	 on  that day. The records which had  been  requisi-
tioned	from the Court of the Additional Sessions Judge	 had
not  been  received  and notices of the bail  had  not	been
issued.	 Acting on an alleged concession made by the  Public
Prosecutor, the Bench allowed the appeal itself and  acquit-
ted  the  respondents. The  appellant-complainant's  Special
Leave  Petition	 No. 2025/84 dated 15.10. 1984	against	 the
said orders of acquittal was allowed to be withdrawn to move
the  High Court for review. The appellants' review  petition
dated  5.12. 1984 having been dismissed on the	ground	that
the High Court had no power to review its judgment under the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, the appellant has now come
in appeal by special leave.
Allowing the appeal, the Court,
    HELD:  1.  Normally, the Supreme Court, as a  matter  of
practice, is reluctant to interfere with an order of acquit-
tal recorded by the High Court at the instance of a  private
complainant, but the circumstances of the case are such that
there is no other alternative but to interfere in this
306
case.  The  procedure adopted by the High Court was  not  in
consonance  with  the procedure established by law  and	 has
resulted in flagrant miscarriage of justice. [306H; 307A]
    Under  Section  385 of the Code of	Criminal  Procedure,
1973  it was obligatory for the High Court to have  fixed  a
date for the hearing of the appeal and sent for the  records
of the Court of Sessions and thereafter hear the parties  on
merits. It does no credit to any branch of administration of
justice	 that  an  appeal against  conviction  or  acquittal
should	be  allowed without the Appellate Court	 having	 the
records before it and without pursuing the evidence  adduced
by the prosecution. Assuming that the learned Public  Prose-
cutor  conceded that there was no evidence, the	 High  Court
had  time to satisfy itself upon perusal of the record	that
there  was no reliable and credible evidence to warrant	 the
conviction  of the accused under s. 148 and s.302 read	with
s. 149 of the Indian Penal Code. [308B-E]



JUDGMENT:
    CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No.  94
Of 1987.
    From  the Judgment and Order dated 8.2.1985 of the	Cal-
cutta High Court in Crl. A.No. 112 of 1984.
Parijat Sinha and B.D. Ahmed for the Appellant.
K.C. Aggarwala and P.K. Chakravarthy for the Respondents.
The Order of the Court was delivered:
ORDER
Special' leave granted. Arguments heard.
    The	 short question involved in this appeal	 is  whether
the  High  Court was justified in allowing the	appeal	pre-
ferred by the accused persons against their conviction under
s. 148 and s.302 reads with s. 149 of the Indian Penal Code,
1860  without  having the records of the Court	of  Sessions
before it and without perusal of the evidence adduced by the
prosecution.
    Normally, this Court, as a matter of practice, is reluc-
tant to interfere with an order of acquittal recorded by the
High Court at the instance of a private complainant, but the
circumstances of the case
307
are  such that there is no other alternative for us  but  to
interfere. We wish to mention that earlier the Court had  in
Special	 Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 2025/84 dated  15.10.1984
allowed the petitioner-complainant to withdraw the  petition
to  move the High Court for review. The petitioner on  5.12.
1984  filed  an application for review but  the	 High  Court
dismissed the same by its order dated 8.2.1985 on the ground
that  it had no power to review its judgment under the	Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1973. The complainant has accordingly
applied	 for special leave. The application is much  belated
but we have no other alternative but to interfere.
    The	 facts. Aggrieved by their conviction  and  sentence
under s. 148 and s.302 read with s. 149 of the Indian  Penal
Code by the Additional Sessions Judge, 1st Court, Burdwan by
his  judgment and sentence dated 19.3.1984, the	 respondents
preferred an appeal to the Calcutta High Court. On 22.3.1984
a  Division  Bench of the High Court (P.C.  Barooah  and  S.
Chakravarty, JJ) admitted the appeal but did not grant	bail
to the respondents on that date and reserved them liberty to
apply for bail later. It directed that the records be requi-
sitioned  from	the Court of Sessions.	Within	a  fortnight
thereafter i.e. on 12.4.1984, the application for bail moved
by  the respondents came up for consideration. On  that	 day
the appeal was not listed for heating. The records which had
been requisitioned from the Court of the Additional Sessions
Judge had not been received and notices of the bail had	 not
been  issued.  Instead of dealing with the  application	 for
bail,  the learned Judges appeared to have acted on  an	 al-
leged  concession made by the learned Public Prosecutor	 and
acquitted the respondents.
    The	 learned  Judges during the course  of	their  order
observed that the contention on behalf of the respondents in
support of their bail application was that the alleged dying
declaration made by the deceased Jagannath Ghose having been
disbelieved  by	 the learned Additional Sessions  Judge,  no
reliance  could be placed on the testimony of  the  eye-wit-
nesses	as the place of incident was not visible from  where
they  are alleged to have seen the occurrence and also	that
about  100 persons had surrounded the victim and as such  it
was not possible to definitely state that only the 8 accused
i.e. the respondents were involved. After stating this,	 the
learned Judge observed:
"The  learned  Public Prosecutor in his usual  fairness	 has
pointed	 out  that although the witnesses spoke of  4/5	 in-
juries, the deceased had actually 27."
308
and  added that this was a fit case where benefit  of  doubt
should be given to the accused and accordingly said that  no
useful	purpose would be served in having a paper-book	pre-
pared  and  keeping the accused in further  agony.  In	that
view,  the learned Judges allowed the appeal, set aside	 the
conviction  and sentence passed on the respondents on  their
conviction under s. 148 and s.302 read s. 149 of the  Indian
Penal Code.
    We are constrained to observe that the procedure adopted
by  the High Court was no in consonance with  the  procedure
established  by	 law. Under s.385 of the  Code	of  Criminal
Procedure,  it	was obligatory for the High Court to  fix  a
date  for  the hearing of the appeal and then send  for	 the
records	 of  the Court of Sessions and hear the	 parties  on
merits.	 There was no warrant for the procedure	 adopted  by
the  learned Judges in disposing of the appeal in this	cha-
valler	manner. It does no credit to any branch of  adminis-
tration of justice that an appeal against conviction  should
be  allowed without the Appellate Court having	the  records
before	it and without perusing the evidence adduced by	 the
prosecution.  To  say the least, there has been	 a  flagrant
carriage of justice. It may be, as the High Court records in
order,	that  the learned Public  Prosecutor  conceded	that
there was no evidence but then the High Court had to satisfy
itself	upon perusal of the records that there was no  reli-
able and credible evidence to warrant the conviction of	 the
accused	 under	s.  148 and s.302 read with s.	149  of	 the
Indian Penal Code.
    The result therefore is that the appeal succeeds and  is
allowed.  The order of acquittal recorded by the High  Court
is  set	 aside	and we direct the High Court  to  admit	 the
appeal	to its file and dispose of it afresh notice  to	 the
parties and after the records requisitioned are received  by
it.  After the respondents nos.-2-9 are taken into  custody,
they may apply to the High Court for being enlarged on bail.
The High Court will deal with the application on its merits.
S.R.						      Appeal
allowed.
309




