

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Kanubhai Brahmbhatt vs State Of Gujarat on 18 February, 1987Equivalent citations: 1987 AIR 1159, 1987 SCR  (2) 314
Author: M Thakkar
Bench: Thakkar, M.P. (J)
           PETITIONER:
KANUBHAI BRAHMBHATT

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF GUJARAT

DATE OF JUDGMENT18/02/1987

BENCH:
THAKKAR, M.P. (J)
BENCH:
THAKKAR, M.P. (J)
RAY, B.C. (J)

CITATION:
 1987 AIR 1159		  1987 SCR  (2) 314
 JT 1987 (1)   475	  1987 SCALE  (1)366


ACT:
    Constitution   of	India,	 1950,	 Article    32--Writ
Petition--Filing of--Sometimes reasons good and	 substantial
exist  to direct writ petitioner to approach High  Court  in
First  instance--Faith	to be inspired in the  hierarchy  of
courts.
    Practice	 &    Procedure,     Supreme	 Court--Writ
petition--Filing  of--Litigant	to be directed	to  approach
High  Court if good and substantial reasons exist--Faith  to
be inspired in the hierarchy of courts.



HEADNOTE:
    In a writ petition filed under Article 32 of the Consti-
tution	of India, the Court found that good and	 substantial
reasons existed for directing the petitioner to approach the
concerned High Court in the first instance instead of knock-
ing at the doors of this Court straightaway. While directing
so, this Court,
    HELD: 1. If Supreme Court takes upon itself to do every-
thing which even the High Court can do, this Court will	 not
be able to do what this Court alone can do under Art. 136 of
the  Constitution of India, and other provisions  conferring
exclusive jurisdiction on this Court. There is no reason  to
assume that the concerned High Court will not do justice. Or
that  this Court alone can do justice. If this Court  enter-
tains Writ Petitions at the instance of parties who approach
this  Court  directly instead of approaching  the  concerned
High Court in the first instance, tens of thousands of	Writ
Petitions  would  in course of time be	instituted  in	this
Court  directly.  The  inevitable result will  be  that	 the
arrears pertaining to matters in respect of which this Court
exercises exclusive jurisdiction under the Constitution will
assume more alarming proportions. [316B-D]
    2. It is as important to do justice at this level, as to
inspire	 confidence  in the litigants that justice  will  be
meted out to them at the High Court level, and other levels.
Faith  must be inspired in the hierarchy of Courts  and	 the
institution  as a whole. Not only in this Court	 alone.	 And
this  objective can be achieved only by this  Court  showing
trust  in  the	High Courts by directing  the  litigants  to
approach the High Courts in
315
the first instance. Besides, as a matter of fact, if matters
like  the  present one are instituted in  the  High  Courts,
there  is  a likelihood of the same being disposed  of	much
more  quickly,	and equally effectively, on account  of	 the
decentralisation  of the process of  administering  justice.
[316E-G]



JUDGMENT:
ORIGINAL JURISDICTION: Writ Petition No. 1669 of 1986.
(Under Article 32 of the Constitution of India).
By post.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
    THAKKAR,  J.  Reasons, good and substantial,  exist	 for
directing  the	petitioner to approach	the  concerned	High
Court in the first instance instead of knocking at the doors
of  this  Court straightaway. And these need to	 be  spelled
out.
    An	illustration may tell more effectively, what  other-
wise may not be told as effectively, and perhaps, only	with
some  embarrassment.  Suppose  there is	 only  one  National
Hospital  established especially for  performing  open-heart
surgery	 which cannot be performed elsewhere in any  of	 the
eighteen  Regional  Hospitals. What will happen to  the	 pa-
tients needing such surgery, if the National Hospital  which
alone is specially equipped for this type of surgery, throws
its  doors wide open also for patients suffering from  other
ailments  who  can be treated by any and every	one  of	 the
eighteen  Regional  Hospitals? More  particularly  when	 the
patients  already admitted for such surgery by the  National
Hospital are already lying unattended to on its floors,	 and
in  its corridors, for an unconscionably long time?  Showing
sympathy  for a patient with other than a heart problem	 who
can  also be treated equally effectively, and  perhaps	much
more  quickly,	may  well constitute cruelty  to  the  heart
patients  who can be treated only by the  National  Hospital
established especially and exclusively for the treatment  of
such patients. Will it not be more merciful to all concerned
(by  being firm enough) to tell those suffering	 from  other
than heart problems to go to Regional Hospitals, instead  of
insisting  on being treated at the National Hospital,  which
also  can  of  course treat them, but only at  the  cost  of
neglecting the heart patients who have nowhere else to	go'?
More  so as the patients going to the Regional Hospital	 may
well  benefit  much more by securing more  personalized	 and
urgent	attention thereat. On the other hand, not to  do  so
many  well amount to being engaged in trying to relieve	 the
distress of those whose distress can be
316
removed	 by  any one else at the cost of refusing  to  treat
those who cannot be treated by any one else.
    If	this Court takes upon itself to do everything  which
even the High Courts can do, this Court will not be able  to
do  what this Court alone can do under Art. 136 of the	Con-
stitution  of India, and other provisions conferring  exclu-
sive  jurisdiction  on	this Court. There is  no  reason  to
assume that the concerned High Court will not do justice. Or
that  this Court alone can do justice. If this Court  enter-
tains Writ Petitions at the instance of parties who approach
this  Court  directly instead of approaching  the  concerned
High Court in the first instance, tens of thousands of	Writ
Petitions  would  in course of time be	instituted  in	this
Court  directly.   The inevitable result will  be  that	 the
arrears pertaining to matters in respect of which this Court
exercises exclusive jurisdiction under the Constitution will
assume	more alarming proportions. As it is, more  than	 ten
years old Civil Appeals and Criminal Appeals are sobbing for
attention.  It will occasion great misery and immense  hard-
ship to tens of thousands of litigants if the seriousness of
this  aspect  is not sufficiently realized. And this  is  no
imaginary phobia. A dismissed government servant has to wait
for nearly ten years for redress in this Court.' A  litigant
whose  appeal  has  been dismissed by  wrongly	refusing  to
condone	 delay has to wait for 14 years before his wrong  is
righted	 by this Court.2 The time for  imposing	 self-disci-
pline has already come, even if it involves shedding of some
amount	of institutional-ego, or raising of some  eye-brows.
Again, it is as important to do justice at this level, as to
inspire	 confidence  in the litigants that justice  will  be
meted out to them at the High Court level, and other levels.
Faith  must be inspired in the hierarchy of Courts  and	 the
institution  as a whole. Not only in this Court	 alone.	 And
this  objective can be achieved only by this  Court  showing
trust  in the High Court by directing the litigants  to	 ap-
proach	the High Court in the first instance. Besides, as  a
matter	of fact, if matters like the present one are  insti-
tuted  in the High Court, there is a likelihood of the	same
being disposed of much more quickly, and equally  effective-
ly,  on	 account of the decentralisation of the	 process  of
administering justice. We are of the opinion that the  peti-
tioner should be directed to adopt this course and  approach
the High Court.
* More than 9000 are already pending now.
1. Kashinath Dikshita v. Union of India and others (SCC 1986
Vol. 3 p. 229)
2. Shankarrao v. Chandrasenkunwar (Civil Appeal No.  1355(N)
of 1973 decided on January 29, 1987.
317
    It	needs  to be clarified that it will be open  to	 the
High Court to call upon the petitioner to present a properly
framed Writ Petition without obliging him to incur the legal
and  other incidental expenditure if the  petitioner  cannot
afford the same. The matter may in such an event be assigned
to  a learned Advocate practicing in the High Court  through
the  State  Legal Aid and Assistance Board, or	through	 the
High  Court Legal Aid Committee which can provide  him	with
the requisite funds to enable him to do the needful. It will
also  be open to the High Court to request the learned	Dis-
trict  Judge  of Vadodara to look into the matter  from	 the
point of view of the complaints made in the letter in  ques-
tion,  and  make an appropriate report to  enable  the	High
Court  to pass such suitable orders as may be called for  in
the  facts and circumstances of the case in order to  secure
ends of justice.
    These  are	the  reasons which we  'now'  articulate  in
support of the order we passed 'then'.
M.L.A.
318
