

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Hindu Jea Band, Jaipur vs Regional Director, Employees' ... on 20 February, 1987Equivalent citations: 1987 AIR 1166, 1987 SCR  (2) 377
Author: E Venkataramiah
Bench: Venkataramiah, E.S. (J)
           PETITIONER:
HINDU JEA BAND, JAIPUR

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
REGIONAL DIRECTOR, EMPLOYEES' STATEINSURANCE CORPORATION, JA

DATE OF JUDGMENT20/02/1987

BENCH:
VENKATARAMIAH, E.S. (J)
BENCH:
VENKATARAMIAH, E.S. (J)
SINGH, K.N. (J)

CITATION:
 1987 AIR 1166		  1987 SCR  (2) 377
 1987 SCC  (2) 101	  JT 1987 (1)	518
 CITATOR INFO :
 D	    1988 SC 113	 (6)


ACT:
    Employees	State	Insurance,   Act,   1948,    section
1(5)--Whether the power conferred under section 1(5) of	 the
Act  on	 the State Government to extend all or	any  of	 the
provisions  of the Act to other Establishments in the  State
suffers	 from the vice of excessive delegation of  essential
legislative powers.
    Notification  issued by the Rajasthan State dated  20.9.
1975 under section 1(5) of the E.S.I. Act, whereby shops  in
which 20 or more persons had been employed for wages on	 any
day  of the preceding 12 months were also brought under	 the
purview of the Act with effect from 26.10. 1975--Whether the
place where business of supplying the services of  musicians
or band players a "shop"--Whether the business being  inter-
mittent or seasonal, offends Articles 14, 19(1)(g) and 21 of
the  Constitution--Employees  State  Insurance	Act,   1948,
sections 1(4), 2(12).



HEADNOTE:
    All the provisions of the Employees State Insurance Act,
1948  were extended with effect from 26.10.1975, to  certain
classes	 of establishments and areas in the State of  Rajas-
than,  by virtue of a Notification dated September 20,	1975
issued	under sub-section (5) of section 1 of the Act.	Item
3(iii)	in  the Schedule to the	 said  Notification  brought
within	the  purview of the Act shops in which	20  or	more
persons	 had been employed for wages on any day of the	pre-
ceding 12 months.
    M/s	 Hindu Jea Band, Jaipur had employed 23	 persons  on
wages  during the relevant period, but did not	comply	with
the  provisions of the Act. The demand made by the  authori-
ties  of the Employees' State Insurance Corporation to	make
contributions  as  required under the Act with	effect	from
26.10.1975  was questioned by M/s Hindu Jea Band by a  peti-
tion under section 75 of the Act before the Employees  State
Insurance Court on two grounds; (i) that the place where  it
was  carrying on business was not a shop; and (ii) that	 its
business being one of the intermittent or seasonal character
of  the	 Act could not be extended to its  business.  Having
lost the case before the E.S.I. Court and in appeal
378
before	the  High Court, the petitioner has come  in  appeal
before	the Supreme Court. The petitioner also filed a	writ
petition  under Article 32 of the  Constitution	 challenging
the  Notification as violative of Articles 14, 19(1)(g)	 and
21  of the Constitution, and section 1(5) of the Act  itself
as suffering from the vice of excessive delegation of legis-
lative powers.
Dismissing the petitions, the Court
    HELD:1. The place, where the petitioner has been  carry-
ing on business of making available on payment of the stipu-
lated  price  the services of the members of  the  group  of
musicians  employed by it on wages is a shop, to  which	 the
Act  is	 applicable  by virtue	of  the	 Notification  dated
20.9.1975  issued under section 1(5) of the Act which  is  a
beneficient legislation. Though the word 'shop' has not been
defined	 in  the Act. a shop is no  doubt  an  establishment
(other	than  a factory) to which the Act  can	be  extended
under  section 1(5) of the Act provided	 other	requirements
are satisfied. [380D-E]
    2.	The fact that the services are rendered by  the	 em-
ployees' engaged by the petitioner intermittently or  during
marriages  does	 not  entitle the petitioner  to  claim	 any
exemption  from	 the operation of the Act. as  much  as	 the
place  of business of the petitioner is a "shop" and  not  a
"factory"  as  defined	in section 2(12)  and  section	1(4)
refers	only to the factories. Further, the services of	 the
employees  of the petitioner are not confined only  to	mar-
riages	which now a days take place throughout the year	 but
also to provide music at several other social functions also
which may take place during all seasons. [380G-H; 381A]
    The	 definition  of an "employee" under the	 Act  has  a
wider meaning. The employees who worked outside the business
premises  but  those  whose duties are	connected  with	 the
business are also 'employees' within the meaning of  section
2(9)(i) of the Act. Even these employees who are paid  daily
wages or those who are part-time employees are employees for
purposes of the Act. [381B]
    Nagpur Electric Light & Power Ltd. v. Regional  Director
Employees State Insurance Corporation etc., [1967] 3 SCR 92,
referred to.
    3. The power conferred upon the State under section 1(5)
does  not  suffer from the vice of excessive  delegation  of
essential  legislative powers. Nor does the  application  of
the Act to businesses like the one which is being carried on
by the petitioner cannot be said to be violative of Articles
14 or 19(1 )(g) or section 21 of the Constitution. [381D-E]
379



JUDGMENT:
    CIVIL  APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Special  Leave  Petition
(Civil) No. 1743 of 1987.
    From  the  Judgment and Order dated 7.11.  1986  of	 the
Rajasthan  high Court in S.B. Civil Misc. Appeal No.  59  of
1980.
WITH
Civil Writ Petition No. 197 of 1877
Under Article 32 of the Constitution of India.
S.  Rangarajan, B.P. Singh and ,Sanjay Parikh for the  Peti-
tioner.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
    VENKATARAMIAH,  J. The petitioner M/s. Hindu  Jea  Band,
Jaipur which is a partnership firm carrying on the  business
of playing music on occasions, such as, marriages and  other
social functions questioned its liability to pay the contri-
bution	under the provisions of the Employees' State  Insur-
ance  Act, 1948 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Act') in  a
petition  filed under section 75 of the Act before  the	 Em-
ployees'  State Insurance Court, Jaipur principally  on	 two
grounds (i) that the place where it was carrying on business
was  not  a  shop and (ii) that its business  being  one  of
intermittent  or  seasonal character the Act  could  not  be
extended  to  its business. The Employees'  State  Insurance
Court  rejected	 the petition filed by	the  petitioner	 and
directed it to pay the amount which had been computed as the
arrears	 by  the Regional Director of the  Employees'  State
Insurance  Corporation, Jaipur. An appeal filed against	 the
decision of the Employees' State Insurance Court, Jaipur  by
the petitioner was dismissed by the High Court of Rajasthan.
This petition under Article 136 of the Constitution is filed
against	 the judgment of the High Court. The petitioner	 has
also filed a writ petition under Article 32 of the Constitu-
tion questioning the validity of sub-section (5) of  section
1  of the Act and the notification issued by the State	Gov-
ernment under it to which reference will be made hereafter.
    The Act did not apply to shops and such other establish-
ments  straight	 away on the Act coming into  force  in	 the
State of Rajasthan. But by the notification dated  September
20, 1975 issued under subsection (5) of section 1 of the Act
the  Government of Rajasthan extended all the provisions  of
the Act to certain classes of establishments
380
and  areas  in the State notification. Item 3 (iii)  in	 the
Schedule to the said notification brought within the purview
of  the Act shops in which 20 or more persons had  been	 em-
ployed	for wages on any day of the preceding 12 months	 and
appointed  on  October 26, 1975 as the date from  which	 the
said  notification would come into force. The petitioner  as
held  by the Employees' State Insurance Court, had  employed
23  persons on wages during the relevant period.  Since	 the
petitioner did not comply with the provisions of the Act the
authorities  of the Employees' State Insurance	Corporation,
Jaipur	called upon the petitioner to make contributions  as
required  by the Act with effect from October 26, 1975.	 The
petition  before  the Employees' State Insurance  Court	 was
filed  by the petitioner on such a demand being made  on  it
questioning the validity of the said demand.
    The first contention urged in support of the petition is
that  since the petitioner was not selling any goods in	 the
place of its business but was only engaged in arranging	 for
musical performances on occasions such as marriages etc. its
business premises cannot be called a 'shop'. We do not agree
with the narrow construction placed by the petitioner on the
expression  'shop' which appears in the notification  issued
under section 1(5) of the Act which is a beneficient  legis-
lation.	 The word 'shop' has not been defined in the Act.  A
shop is no doubt an establishment (other than a factory)  to
which the Act can be extended under section 1(5) of the	 Act
provided  other requirements are satisfied. In Collins	Eng-
lish  Dictionary  the meaning of the word  'shop'  is  given
thus: "(i) a place esp. a small building for the retail sale
of  goods and services and (ii) a place for the	 performance
of  a specified type of work; workshop." It is obvious	from
the  above meaning that a place where services are  sold  on
retail	basis  is also a shop. It is not disputed  that	 the
petitioner  has	 been  making available on  payment  of	 the
stipulated price the services of the members of the group of
musicians employed by it on wages. We, therefore, hold	that
the place where the petitioner has been carrying on business
is  a shop to which the Act is applicable by virtue  of	 the
notification referred to above. The first contention, there-
fore, fails.
    We	do not find much substance in the second  contention
too. The fact that the services are rendered by the  employ-
ees  engaged  by  the petitioner  intermittently  or  during
marriages  does	 not  entitle the petitioner  to  claim	 any
exemption  from	 the operation of the  Act.  The  petitioner
cannot rely on sub-section (4) of section 1 of the Act which
refers	to  factories only in support of its  case.  We	 are
concerned  in  this case with a shop and not  a	 factory  as
defined under section 2(12) of the
381
Act. Moreover the services of the employees of the petition-
er  are	 not confined only to marriages. It cannot  also  be
said that marriages take place only during a specified	part
of  the year. Nowa-days marriages take place throughout	 the
year. The petitioner provides music at several other  social
functions also which may take place 'during all seasons. The
definition of an 'employee' under the Act has a wider  mean-
ing. The employees who worked outside the business  premises
but  those whose duties are connected with the business	 are
also  'employees' within the meaning of section	 2(9)(i)  of
the  Act.  (see Nagpur Electric Light & Power Co.  Ltd.	  v.
Regional  Director  Employees  State  Insurance	 Corporation
Etc.), [1967] 3 S.C.R. 92. Even those employees who are paid
daily wages or those who are part-time employees are employ-
ees for purposes of the Act. Hence we do not find any  merit
in  this  special Leave Petition. The  petition,  therefore,
fails and it is dismissed.
    Along with the Special Leave Petition the petitioner has
presented before this Court a Writ Petition under Article 32
of the Constitution questioning the validity of the  notifi-
cation issued by the State Government on the ground that the
power  conferred  under the Act on the State  Government  by
sub-section  (5) of section 1 authorising the State  Govern-
ment  to extend all or any of the provisions of the  Act  to
other  establishments in the State suffers from the vice  of
excessive delegation of essential legislative powers. It  is
also contended that the application of the Act to businesses
like  the  one which is being carried on by  the  petitioner
during	certain	 seasons only of the year  is  violative  of
Article 14, Article 19(1)(g) and Article 21 of the Constitu-
tion. Having carefully considered the submission made by the
learned	 counsel for the petitioner we find no merit in	 any
of  the	 contentions urged in the writ	Petition.  The	Writ
Petition is also, therefore, dismissed.
S.R.						    Petition
dismissed.
382




