

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Workers Of M/S Rohtas Industries ... vs M/S Rohtas Industries Ltd on 27 April, 1987Equivalent citations: 1987 SCR  (2)1216, 1987 SCC  (2) 588
Author: G Oza
Bench: Oza, G.L. (J)
           PETITIONER:
WORKERS OF M/S ROHTAS INDUSTRIES LTD.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
M/S ROHTAS INDUSTRIES LTD.

DATE OF JUDGMENT27/04/1987

BENCH:
OZA, G.L. (J)
BENCH:
OZA, G.L. (J)
MISRA RANGNATH

CITATION:
 1987 SCR  (2)1216	  1987 SCC  (2) 588
 JT 1987 (2)   283	  1987 SCALE  (1)894


ACT:
    Bihar  Relief Undertakings (Special Provisions) Act	 198
I--Section 3---'Relief undertaking'--Declaration of--Workers
not  paid  salaries and wages as ordered  by  Court--Ordered
that  goods lying in stock be sold and out of sale  proceeds
the workers be paid their dues.



HEADNOTE:
    By order dated 5.2.1986 this Court had directed that all
salaries and wages due to the workers from May 1984  onwards
shall  be paid to them In three instalments. They  have	 not
yet been paid.
    It was brought to the notice of the Court that the State
of  Bihar has issued a Notification dated December 12,	1986
declaring the respondent-industry a sick industry under s. 3
of  the Bihar Relief Undertakings (Special Provisions)	Act,
1981  and that the said Industrial Undertaking shall be	 and
remain a relief undertaking for one year.
    On	behalf	of the industry it was	contended  that	 the
liability of the industry for payment to the workers  cannot
be  enforced. However, counsel for the State  conceded	that
the  State  Government wants that the wages to	the  workers
should be paid.
    According  to  the	Report of  the	Official  Liquidator
finished products of the value of Rs.91,77,000 are lying  in
stocks and that from May, 1984 till 8th July, 1984 an amount
of  Rs.89,00,000 remains to be paid to the workers as  their
salaries and emoluments.
    On behalf of the financial institution it was  contended
that the products lying in stocks are pledged with them	 and
they have prior claim over the sale proceeds of these stocks
and,  therefore,  the  products could not be  sold  and	 the
workers	 could	not  be paid off. It was  suggested  that  a
scheme	has been drawn up to revive the industry and  finan-
cial  problems may arise if the stock is sold out and  wages
paid to the workera out of sale proceeds.
Issuing directions the Court,
1217
    HELD:  1. Though the stock of products is  pledged	with
Banks and they have a priority in law, but it is the  result
of  the hard-work of the workers that these stocks could  be
produced. Therefore, it could not be said that the wages and
emoluments  for	 the period upto closure would not  rank  in
priority. Their subsistance and living is also of  paramount
importance  and has to rank with highest priority. For	this
reason the Government of India is keen to have a scheme	 for
revival	 of  this  industry and the  State  Government	also
desires	 that  the workers should be  paid  their  salaries.
[1219A-D]
    2.	Looking to all the circumstances and taking a  broad
and humane view of the situation it would be just and proper
that these goods which are lying in stock should be sold out
and  out  of the sale proceeds the workers  should  be	paid
their  dues upto the date of the closure (from May  1984  to
8th  July, 1984). The Official Liquidator will	ensure	that
the disposal fetches the best rates. This shall be completed
within two months. [1219F]
    3.	The  financial institutions  have  other  sufficient
securities  and properties of the Company and if the  stocks
of finished products are sold to meet the basic requirements
of  the workers, their interests would not be  in  jeopardy.
[1219G-H]
    4. The balance out of the sale proceeds, if any, will be
utilised  for meeting other pressing demands in the  discre-
tion  of  the Official Liquidator subject to orders  of	 the
Court. [1220B]
    5. The Official Liquidator may keep the amount of insur-
ance claim separately and allow the State Bank to adjust the
same against its insurance. [1219G]
    6.	Issuance  of  the Notification by  the	Bihar  State
Government will not come in the way of sale of these  assets
and payment of the workers. [1220C]



JUDGMENT:
ORIGINAL JURISDICTION: Writ Petition No. 5222 of 1985.
Under Article 32 of the Constitution of India.
R.K. Garg, R.S. Singh and S.K. Verma for the Petitioner.
    K.	Parasaran,  Attorney General, B.  Datta,  Additional
Solicito  General,  A.K. Ganguli, Dr. Y.S. Chitale  and	 Dr.
Shankar Ghosh
1218
P.P. Singh, Ranjit Kr. Pramod Dayal, D. Goburdhun, K. Swamy,
Ms.  Sushma Suri, Probir Mitra. A.K. Ghose,  M.M.  Gangadeb,
Dhanjay	 Chandrachud,  P.R. Seetharaman,  D.K.	Sinha,	K.R.
Narnbiar and A.K. Sil for the appearing parties.
The Order of the Court was delivered by
    OZA,  J.  Heard learned counsel for the  petitioners  as
well  as the respondent, the various financial	institutions
including the Banks and also counsel for the State of Bihar.
By  orders of this Court dated 5.2.86 it was  directed	that
all  salaries  and wages-due to the workers  from  May	1984
onwards	 shall	be paid to them in  'three  instalments:  It
appears	 that  they have not yet been paid  inspite  of	 the
directions  from  this	Court. It was also  brought  to	 our
notice	that notwithstanding that order of this	 Court,	 the
State of Bihar has issued a Notification dated December	 12,
1986,  wherein this industry has been declared to be a	sick
industry  under Section 3 of the Bihar	Relief	Undertakings
(Special  provisions) Act, 1981 (Bihar Act No. 12  of  1982)
and  by this Notification the Bihar Government has  declared
the  said  Industrial  :Undertaking shall be  and  remain  a
relief	undertakings for one year from the date of issue  of
the Notification. On ;the basis of this an attempt was	made
to suggest that the liability of the industry for payment to
the  workers can not be enforced. However,  learned  counsel
appearing  for the State of Bihar frankly conceded  that  so
far  as the liability of payment of wages to the workers  is
concerned the State Government wants that it should be paid.
As directed by this Court a report had been submitted by the
Official  Liquidator  in  the case of  this  industry.	This
report	shows  that the products produced by  this  industry
which are lying in stocks are of the value of  Rs.91,77,000.
This report also discloses that from the month of May,	1984
till 8th July, 1984 when this industry closed down an amount
of  Rs.89,00,000 remains to be paid to the workers as  their
salaries and emoluments.
    The	 learned  counsel appearing for the  State  Bank  of
India' and other financial institutions attempted to contend
that  these goods which are the finished products  lying  in
stock are pledged with these Banks and, therefore, they have
a prior claim over the sale proceeds of these stocks and  it
was,  therefore, contended that this could not be  sold	 and
the workers could not be paid off. On the other hand it	 was
suggested that in fact a scheme has been drawn up to  review
the industry in the interests of the workers and the society
in general and in that scheme of starting the industry again
financial  problems may arise and if this stock is sold	 out
and the money collected therefrom-are
	   1219
paid out to the workers then it may create difficulties.
    It	is no doubt true that these' products the  stock  of
which have been shown' in the report and the value of  which
has been shown by the Liquidator as Rs.91,77,000 is  pledged
with Banks, is a priority in law in favour of the Banks but:
lit  also; could not be disputed that these stocks were	 the
products of this industry before its closure and, therefore,
the  workers  also contributed their labour and	 it  is	 the
result	of their hard-work that these stocks could  be	pro-
duced  and  in our opinion therefore, it could not  be	said
that  the wages and emoluments for the period  upto  closure
would  not  rank in priority. It is  also  significant	that
after the closure in July, 1984,. till today in spite of the
order passed by this' Court the workers have not been  paid.
Their  subsistance and living is also perhaps  of  paramount
importance  and has to rank with highest priority. It is  in
view of this as it appears, that the Government of India  is
keen to have a scheme for revival of this industry.  Learned
counsel for:the State of Bihar also frankly conceded that so
far as payment to the workers is concerned the State Govern-
ment  also desires that they should be paid their  salaries.
It  is	no doubt true that at present there  are  no  assets
available out of which the whole payment of all the dues  to
the workers from May 1984 till today could be done but	from
out  of these assets the products which are lying in  stocks
valued	at  Rs.91.77,000 the salaries and the  dues  of	 the
workers	 from  May 1984 tilt the date of  closure  could  be
made. It was contended that in case these stocks are  liqui-
dated and the amount collected are paid off to the  workers,
difficulty may arise as this asset which has been taken into
account will not be available for the scheme of	 re-starting
the industry. Looking to all the circumstances and taking  a
broad  and humane view of the situation we are of the  opin-
ion, that it would be just and proper that these goods which
are  lying in stock should be sold and out of the sale	pro-
ceeds the workers should be paid their dues upto the date of
closure (from May 1984 to July 1984 i.e. 8th July, 1984)  so
that  at  least	 they will get	something  for	subsistance.
Learned counsel for the State Bank of India pointed out that
his client has paid for the insurance of certain assets	 and
for loss thereof in whole or in part, the insurance has paid
for  the loss. The Official Liquidator may keep that  amount
separately  and	 allow	the State Bank to  adjust  the	same
against its insurance. So far as the pledge and the priority
of  the	 financial institutions are concerned,	we  have  no
doubt that they have other sufficient securities and proper-
ties  of the Company and, therefore, if this stock  of	fin-
ished  products are sold to meet the basic  requirements  of
the workers, their interests would not be in jeopardy. Apart
from  it,  we also hope and trust that if the loss  of	this
amount of Rs.91,77,000
1220
somehow	 comes	in way of the scheme of re-starting  of	 the
industry,  the Government of India would find funds to	save
the  situation	and help early revival of  the	Company.  We
therefore direct that these stocks which are lying with	 the
industry  valued at Rs.91,77,000 shall immediately  be	dis-
posed  of  and out of this the wages and other dues  of	 the
workers	 for the period from May 1984 till 8th	July,  1984,
shall  be  met. The balance, if any, will  be  utilised	 for
meeting	 other	pressing demands in the	 discretion  of	 the
Official  Liquitator subject to orders of the Court. We	 are
sure  that  the	 Official Liquitator will  ensure  that	 the
disposal  fetches  the best of rates. We may  also  make  it
clear  that issuance of the notification by the Bihar  State
Government will not come in the way of sale of these  assets
and  payment  to the workers. We direct that this  shall  be
completed  within two months from today. The case  may	come
for further directions in third week of July.
    We	expect that by then with the lead taken by the	Cen-
tral  Government,  the	scheme of revival  would  have	made
sufficient  headway and everyone would be in a	position  to
have an optimistic view of the situation.
A.P.J.
1221
