

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Kailash Kaur vs State Of Punjab on 28 April, 1987Equivalent citations: 1987 AIR 1368, 1987 SCR  (2)1221
Author: V B Eradi
Bench: Eradi, V. Balakrishna (J)
           PETITIONER:
KAILASH KAUR

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF PUNJAB

DATE OF JUDGMENT28/04/1987

BENCH:
ERADI, V. BALAKRISHNA (J)
BENCH:
ERADI, V. BALAKRISHNA (J)
SEN, A.P. (J)

CITATION:
 1987 AIR 1368		  1987 SCR  (2)1221
 1987 SCC  (2) 631	  JT 1987 (2)	278
 1987 SCALE  (1)1172


ACT:
    Indian Penal Code, 1860: s. 302--Bride Burning--Gruesome
murder	of young wife--Barbaric act of pouring kerosene	 oil
and setting her on fire--Duty of the Court to award  maximum
penalty.
Criminal Dial.
Dowry death--Necessity to award maximum punishment.



HEADNOTE:
    The	 prosecution alleged that on the evening of May	 30,
1974  the appellant's daughter caught hold of the  deceased,
and the appellant poured kerosene oil on her and set her  on
fire. On hearing deceased's screams the neighbours rushed to
the  house and extinguished the flames. Thereafter, she	 was
taken to the hospital where on the basis of questions put by
the  doctor (P.W. 2), Head Constable (P.W. 7)  recorded	 her
statement.  She	 expired  on June 1, 1974.  It	was  further
alleged that the husband and his parents were unhappy  about
the  quantum of dowry brought by the deceased and  she	was,
therefore being subjected to severe harassment and maltreat-
ment. In a letter written by the deceased to her father	 she
had  set out the details of the iII treatment meted  to	 her
and expressed grave apprehension that her life was in  immi-
nent danger.
    The trial court convicted the appellant and her daughter
of  the	 offence  under s. 302 I.P.C. acting  on  the  dying
declaration made by the deceased, the letter written by	 her
to  her father and his evidence as to the demands for  dowry
and  the torture inflicted on his daughter. The husband	 was
given benefit of doubt and acquitted.
    The High Court confirmed the conviction of the appellant
but acquitted the daughter giving her benefit of doubt.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court,
    HELD:  1.1. The conviction of the appellant by the	High
Court was fully justified. The dying declaration made by the
deceased wherein
1222
she  has given a clear and vivid account of the	 pouring  of
kerosene  oil  over her body and being set on  fire  by	 the
appellant,  has	 the  ring of truth. The  testimony  of	 the
doctor	(P.W.  2) and the Head Constable  (P.W.	 7)  clearly
establishes  that  she was in a fit condition  to  make	 the
statement.  There was, therefore, no reason whatever not  to
act upon it. [1224D; G]
    1.2.  In addition, there was also  clear  circumstantial
evidence furnished by the letter written by the deceased  to
her  father  and the testimony of the father  regarding	 the
demands	 for dowry and the harassment and torture  inflicted
on  the	 deceased as part of the endeavour to  extract	more
dowry. [1224F-G]
    2. Whenever a case of gruesome murder of a young wife by
the  barbaric process of pouring kerosene oil over the	body
and setting her on fire as the culmination of a long process
of  physical  and mental harassment for extraction  of	more
dowry comes before the court and the offence is brought home
to  the accused beyond reasonable doubt, it is the  duty  of
the  court  to	deal with the case in the  most	 severe	 and
strict	manner and award the maximum penalty  prescribed  by
the law in order that it may operate as a deterrent to other
persons	 from  committing such anti-social  crimes.  [1222H;
1223A]



JUDGMENT:
    CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 221
of 1978.
    From  the  Judgment	 and Order dated  30.3.1978  of	 the
Punjab and Haryana High Court in Criminal Appeal No. 252  of
1975.
    A.N.  Mulla, R.L. Kohli, Harjinder Singh and R.C.  Kohli
for the Appellants.
R.S. Sodhi for the Respondent.
The. Judgment of the Court was delivered by
    BALAKRISHNA	 ERADI, J. This is yet	another	 unfortunate
instance of gruesome murder of a young wife by the  barbaric
process	 of pouring kerosene oil over the body	and  setting
her on fire as the culmination of a long process of physical
and mental harassment for extraction of more dowry. Whenever
such cases come before the Court and the offence is  brought
home to the accused beyond reasonable doubt, it is the	duty
of the Court to deal with it in most severe and
1223
strict	manner and award the maximum penalty  prescribed  by
the law in order that it may operate as a deterrent to other
persons from committing such anti-social crimes.
    Amandeep Kaur, deceased, was married to Avtar Singh	 who
figured	 as  the first accused in the case in  the  Sessions
Court. Kailash Kaur, the appellant, is the mother-in-law  of
the  deceased  and Mahinder Kaur who figured  as  the  third
accused	 in the case is the sister of Avtar Singh. The	hus-
band and his parents were allegedly unhappy about the  quan-
tum  of	 dowry	brought by the deceased and  she  was  being
subjected to severe harassment and maltreatment with a	view
to  extract  more dowry from her parents. Exhibit  PK  is  a
letter	written	 by the deceased to her father	Avtar  Singh
(P.W. 3) in which she has set out the details of the harass-
ment  and maltreatment and expressed her grave	apprehension
that  unless she was immediately taken back to the  father's
house,	her life itself was in imminent danger. On  may	 30,
1974, in the evening. Kailash Kaur and Mahinder Kaur started
quarreling with the deceased and severely abused and threat-
ened  her.  Thereupon,	the deceased went to  her  room	 and
bolted	its  door from inside. Sometime later  Avtar  Singh,
husband	 of  the  deceased, came to the	 house	and  started
knocking  at  the  door of the said room  with	great  force
because of which the door got unbolted. It would appear that
after  the  door was opened Avtar Singh went away  from	 the
house. It is the prosecution case that immediately  thereaf-
ter  Mahinder Kaur caught hold of the deceased	and  Kailash
Kaur  (appellant) poured kerosene oil on her and set her  on
fire.  The deceased started screaming on hearing  which	 the
people	residing in the locality rushed to the house.  Avtar
Singh,	the husband also reached there in the  meantime,  As
she was engulfed in flames, somebody put a blanket on  Aman-
deep  Kaur and extinguished the flames. Thereafter  she	 was
carried	 to the Civil Hospital, Hoshiarpur. Dr. Har  Parkash
Bhatia	(P.W. 2), who examined her sent information  to	 the
local  police  station on receipt of  which  Head  Constable
Naranjan  Singh	 (P.W. 7), went over to	 the  hospital.	 The
doctor	sent everybody other than the Head Constable out  of
the  room where the patient was lying. He told the  deceased
that  he  would	 put her questions about the  cause  of	 her
death. On the basis of the questions put by the doctor, Head
Constable Naranjan Singh (P.W. 7) recorded her statement, on
the  basis  of	which formal First  Information	 Report	 was
lodged at Police Station, Hoshiarpur. Amandeep Kaur  expired
on June 1, 1974.
    At	the  trial the prosecution relied on Ex.  PF/3,	 the
dying  declaration made by the deceased--Amandeep Kaur,	 the
letter Ex. PK writ-
1224
ten  by her to her father Atar Singh (P.W. 3) and  the	evi-
dence  of P.W. 3 wherein he stated that the  appellant,	 her
son  and  daughter were dissatisfied about  the	 quantum  of
dowry brought by Amandeep Kaur and on that account they	 had
been  torturing her. The learned trial Judge acting  on	 the
aforesaid evidence convicted Kailash Kaur and Mahinder	Kaur
of the offence under Section 302 I.P.C.-and acquitted  Avtar
Singh, the husband, accused giving him the benefit of doubt.
    Kailash  Kaur  and Mahinder Kaur carried the  matter  in
appeal before the High Court of Punjab and Haryana. The High
Court  confirmed  the conviction  of  the  appellant--herein
namely, Kailash Kaur, but acquitted Mahinder Kaur giving her
the  benefit of doubt. Aggrieved by the said  judgment,	 the
appellant has preferred this appeal before this Court  after
obtaining special leave.
    Notwithstanding  the  learned and  persuasive  arguments
advanced  before us by Shri A.N. Mulla, Senior	Counsel	 ap-
pearing	 on behalf of the appellant, we find  absolutely  no
merit in this appeal. There is no reason whatever not to act
upon  the dying declaration of the deceased wherein she	 has
given  a clear and vivid account of the pouring of  kerosene
oil  over body and her being set on fire by  the  appellant.
She had also implicated Mahinder Kaur as the person who held
her  while the kerosene oil was being poured on her body  by
the appellant. We have very grave doubts about the legality,
propriety and correctness of the decision of the High  Court
in  so far as it has acquitted Mahinder Kaur by	 giving	 her
the benefit of doubt. But since the State has not  preferred
any  appeal, we are not called upon to go into	that  aspect
any further.
    In addition to the dying declaration there is also clear
circumstantial	evidence furnished by the fetter Ex. PK	 and
the testimony of Atar Singh (P.W. 3) father of the  deceased
regarding  the	demands	 for dowry and	the  harassment	 and
torture inflicted on the deceased by the accused as part  of
the  endeavour to extract more dowry. The dying	 declaration
made by the deceased has the ring of truth and the testimony
of  the	 doctor--P.W. 2 and of the  Head  Constable--P.W.  7
clearly establishes that she was in a fit condition to	make
the  statement. The conviction of the appellant by the	High
Court was, therefore, fully justified and there is absolute-
ly  no ground for interference with the same by this  Court.
We  only express our regret that the Sessions Judge did	 not
treat  this as a fit case for awarding the  maximum  penalty
under the law and that no steps were taken by the
1225
State  Government before the High Court for  enhancement  of
the sentence.
    The	 appeal is accordingly dismissed. The bail  bond  of
the  appellant	will stand cancelled and she will  be  taken
into custody forthwith to serve out the remaining portion of
her sentence.
P.S.S.					      Appeal	dis-
missed.
1226




