

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
I.L. Dhingra & Ors vs State Of U.P. & Ors on 6 April, 1987Equivalent citations: 1987 SCALE  (1)696
Author: O C Reddy
Bench: Reddy, O. Chinnappa (J)
           PETITIONER:
I.L. DHINGRA & ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF U.P. & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT06/04/1987

BENCH:
REDDY, O. CHINNAPPA (J)
BENCH:
REDDY, O. CHINNAPPA (J)
DUTT, M.M. (J)

CITATION:
 1987 SCALE  (1)696


ACT:
    Uttar  Pradesh  Industrial Area Development	 Act,  1976:
NOIDA-Industrial and Urban township--Development  of--Reser-
vation	  of   built   houses	in   favour    of    certain
categories--Validity of.
    Constitution of India, Article 14: Industrial and  Urban
townships--LIG-EWS,  MIG  houses  Reservation in  favour  of
political sufferers, employees of Central Government, Public
Sector Undertakings and International Organisations--Validi-
ty of.



HEADNOTE:
    The New Okhla Development Area Authority (NOIDA) consti-
tuted  under the provisions of the Uttar Pradesh  Industrial
Area Development Act, 1976 for the development of an  indus-
trial  and urban township and for matters  connected  there-
with, announced two schemes, called LIG-EWS and MIG Schemes,
and invited applications for allotment of houses constructed
and  proposed  to be constructed. Later on,  it	 decided  to
reserve	 a certain percentage of houses in the first  scheme
for  some  categories of persons(1) persons whose  land	 had
been acquired for development, (2) entrepreneurs of the area
and their employees, (3) employees of NOIDA Authority,	U.P.
State  Government undertakings, U.P. State  Development	 Au-
thorities  and	U.P. Government, (4)  employees	 of  Central
Government, Government of India Public Undertakings,  Inter-
national  Organisations,  (5) political sufferers,  and	 (6)
nominees of HUDCO. For the MIG Group of houses,	 reservation
was mentioned in the original advertisement.
    Forty  disappointed applicants for allotment of  LIG/EWS
houses	filed  a writ petition	questioning  reservation  in
favour	of entrepreneurs. Another group of six persons,	 who
had  applied  for allotment of MIG houses, also	 filed	writ
petitions. After interim orders were made in these two	sets
of  petitions on March 12, 1982 several hundred	 more  peti-
tions in each category were also filed. All these  petitions
were  heard together on April 30, 1984. As a result  of	 the
various	 orders made by the Court from time to	time,  forty
petitioners  of the first category and five  petitioners  of
the second category were accommodated in the two
793
schemes, and all those who took advantage of the order dated
April 30, 1984 were also accommodated.
Disposing of the writ petitions, the Court,
    HELD: Keeping in view the object of the Act under  which
the NOIDA Authority was constituted, prima facie, the reser-
vation	in  favour of political sufferers and  employees  of
Central government, Government of India public	undertakings
and  international organisations was bad, while	 reservation
in favour of persons whose land has been acquired, entrepre-
neurs  of NOIDA and their employees, employees of NOIDA	 and
nominees of HUDCO was sound and justifiable. [798G-H; 799A]
    In matters of this nature where apart from the fact that
rights	of other parties intervene straightaway when  allot-
ment  is made in their favour, it is not in public  interest
that  housing schemes should be kept in abeyance or  hanging
fire when the need is urgent. [799B-C]
    If some of the petitioners have failed to act with	that
degree	of  promptitude which is expected in  such  matters,
they are not entitled to any relief from the Court. However,
by virtue of the orders made by the Court from time to time,
some  of  them have been benefited by allotment	 of  houses.
Such  benefits	as have accrued to them will  stand  and  no
further orders are necessary. [799C-D]



JUDGMENT:
ORIGINAL JURISDICTION: Writ Petition Nos. 2293-97 of
1982 etc. etc.
(Under Article 32 of the Constitution of India.)
    S.	Markandeya, A.V. Rangam, G. Goswami,  K.B.  Rohtagi,
Tara  Chand Sharma. Mrs. Chitra Markandeya, S.	Mitter,	 Ms.
Abha Jain, N.S. Das Bahl, A. Subba Rao, M. Qurnaruddin, P.N.
Ramalingam, D.K. Garg, A.K. Goel, H.K. Puri, R. Venkatarama-
ni, A.S. Pundir, Mukul Mudgal, R.N.Keswani, Mrs. Rani  Chha-
bra, S.K. Gupta, H.S. Parihar, S.K. Bisaria, K.C. Dua,	N.N.
Sharma, Prem Malhotra, Dalveer Bhandari, B.R. Aggarwal, S.C.
Pate|,	S.K. Verma, Mrs. M. Karanjawala, K.B. Rohtagi,	R.P.
Singh, A.N. Bardiyar, V.K. Verma, R.P. Gupta, Shakeel Ahmed,
and Mrs. Urmila Sirur for the Petitioners.
Anil Dev Singh, Ashok Grover, Ms. A. Subhashini, Mrs.
794
Shobha	Dikshit, Raju Ramachandran, P.K. Ghosh, K.L.  Goyal,
H.S. Parihar and P.P. Singh for the Respondent.
P.H. Parekh, K.K. Gupta and Amlan Ghosh for the Interveners.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
    CHINNAPPA REDDY, J. The Uttar Pradesh Legislature enact-
ed  the Uttar Pradesh Industrial Area Development Act,	1976
for the constitution of an authority for the development  of
certain	 areas in the State into industrial and urban  town-
ships  and  for matters connected therewith. The  New  Okhla
Development Area Authority (NOIDA) was constituted under the
provisions of this Act. NOIDA acquired vast extends of	land
in  the autskirts of Delhi for the purpose of developing  an
industrial  and urban township. NOIDA announced two  schemes
called LIG-EWS and MIG Schemes and invited applications	 for
allotment  of  houses constructed and proposed	to  be	con-
structed  by  them. Several thousand applications  were	 re-
ceived and NOIDA announced closure of the schemes on  Decem-
ber 11, 1980. Though in the original advertisement  relating
to the LIG-EWS scheme, there was no reservation of allotment
in favour of any class of persons, it appears that later  on
NOIDA decided to reserve a certain percentage of houses	 for
some categories of persons in the following manner:-
     "(1) Persons whose land has been
	 acquired by NOIDA for the
	 development of NOlDA		 ... 2%
      (2) Enterpreneurs of NOIDA,
      and their employees	       ... 17%
      (3) Employees of NOIDA, UP
	State Government under-
	taking, UP State Development
	Authorities and UP
	Government		       ... 15%
      (4) Employees of Central
 Government, Government of India,
Public Undertakings, International
Organisations				 ... 5%
(5) Political Sufferers			... 5%
(6) Nominees of HUDCO			... 20%"
795
So far as the MIG houses are concerned, the reservation	 was
mentioned even in the original advertisement inviting appli-
cations for allotment of houses.
    Forty  disappointed applicants for allotment of  LIG-EWS
houses	filed writ petition No. 220 of 1981 primarily  ques-
tioning	 the  reservation  in favour  of  enterpreneurs	 and
seeking	 a direction that the claims of the petitioners	 for
allotment should be considered in any future scheme. A	Rule
Nisi was issued by the court on April 4, 1981 and on May  8,
1981, an interim order was also made restraining NOIDA	from
making	any fresh allotment of houses without obtaining	 the
previous  order of the court. Another group of	six  persons
who  had  applied  for allotment of MIG	 houses	 filed	Writ
Petition  Nos. 2292-97 of 1982 and a similar  interim  order
was made in these petitions also on March 1982. On the	same
day,  that  is, March 12, 1982 the application	for  interim
directions  in Writ Petition No. 220 of 1981 came up  before
another bench and an order was made therein permitting NOIDA
to assign numbers to houses which had already been  allotted
but directing NOIDA to reserve 40 houses, so that the  peti-
tioners could be accommodated if they succeeded in the	writ
petition.  What	 is important to be noted here	is  that  by
March 1982, only 40 persons had approached this court in the
matter	of allotment of houses under the LIG-EWS Scheme	 and
six  persons in the matter of allotment of houses under	 the
MIG  Scheme.  Thereafter there appear to have  been  several
hundred	 petitions of each category. On April 30,  1984	 all
the  petitions were heard together and an order was made  by
this  court consisting of D.A. Desai and R.B. Misra, JJ.  in
the following terms:-
	      "Mr.  A.M.  Srivastava, the  Court  Master  is
	      appointed as Court officer to do the following
	      things:
		       By  our	order dated March  12,	1982
	      this court directed that respondents will	 not
	      allot 40 houses till the disposal of the	writ
	      petition.	 Mr.  O.P.  Rana,  learned   counsel
	      states  that this order was understood by	 the
	      respondents  to mean that 40 houses  shall  be
	      kept  vacant both in EWS Group and LIG  Group.
	      These 40 houses are available for allotment in
	      each of the aforementioned groups.
		       We direct that the petitions in	each
	      EWS  and LIG group who are desirous of  having
	      allotment	 of 'one of the houses reserved	 for
	      the  group shall immediately give their  names
	      with  registration numbers latest by  May	 31,
	      1984 to
	      796
	      Mr.  A.M.	 Srivastava, the Court	Officer	 ap-
	      pointed by the Court. He shall keep a register
	      in  which	 he will register the name  of	each
	      such  intending  original applicant  with	 the
	      registration number. Each such applicant shall
	      also state that he will abide by the order  of
	      this Court with respect to interest and  inci-
	      dental  management charges that the Court	 may
	      determine	 in case of EWS and LIG	 allotments.
	      In  respect of these 40 houses in	 each  group
	      the  price will be the old price at which	 the
	      house in each group was advertised."
			"The   respondent  shall  submit   a
	      statement within four weeks from today  speci-
	      fying the split up of the amount worked out as
	      price of each house in EWS group ranging	from
	      27,000 to Rs.35,000 specifically referring  to
	      the component of price of the land included in
	      the computation."
			"The  respondents  shall  submit   a
	      statement specifying how cost of	construction
	      per  sq.	metre in respect of EWS and  MIG  is
	      determined.  If houses in any group is  subsi-
	      dised without disclosing the names and  nature
	      of the subsidies, the same shall be disclosed.
	      Only  the original applicants for the EWS	 and
	      LIG  group will be entitled for allotment	 but
	      no one is entitled to cross the group in which
	      registration was obtained."
			"Mr. O.P. Rana, learned counsel	 for
	      the  respondents states that respondents	have
	      347 houses of Type III which could be provided
	      to applicants in MIG group and 621 quarters in
	      type II which could be allotted to  applicants
	      in LIG group. It appears that LIG and MIG have
	      acquired new designation as type III and	Type
	      II  group.  It  is,  therefore,  desirable  to
	      permit  applicants  registered in	 MIG  to  be
	      grouped  together with type III group and	 LIG
	      with type II group."
			"Fair	play  and  justice   demands
	      subject  to just exception  applicants  regis-
	      tered in MIG and LIG groups must be allowed to
	      participate in draw of lot for houses in	Type
	      III  and Type II houses with this	 reservation
	      that  each of the applicants in either LIG  or
	      MIG shall undertake to pay prize as now  fixed
	      namely  Rs.1,52,000  for MIG  house  each	 and
	      Rs.59,000 for LIG house (type III and type  II
	      respec-
	      797
	      tively). It is hereby clarified that those who
	      had  registered in MIG group earlier shall  be
	      entitled	to participate for the allotment  of
	      type  III quarters and those who	had  applied
	      for LIG group shall be entitled to participate
	      for allotment of type II quarters. Each one of
	      the applicant who desires to participate shall
	      follow the same prescribed procedure as herein
	      indicated	 giving	 the  necessary	 undertaking
	      that  he	will abide by the direction  of	 the
	      Court.  The applicants will give	their  names
	      and  registration	 number latest by May  3  l,
	      1984.  Six  weeks thereafter  the	 respondents
	      shall proceed to draw the lot for allotment if
	      there are more applications than the available
	      number  of  quarters in the  presence  of	 the
	      Court Officer who shall hold and supervise the
	      draw with the assistance of the NOIDA AUTHORI-
	      TIES  and each one who succeed in the draw  of
	      lot  shall be put in actual possession  within
	      four weeks thereafter."
		       "The Nodia authorities will give wide
	      publicity to this order."
		       "Learned counsel on either side	will
	      exchange	the responses to  various  proposals
	      rooted out within two or three days from today
	      and  the matters will be listed  after  summer
	      vacation."
On  July  17, 1984, the earlier order was clarified  in	 the
following manner:-
	      "(1)  Pursuant  to the order dated  March	 12,
	      1982  the NOIDA authorities were directed	 not
	      to  allot	 40  houses to anyone  so  that	 the
	      petitioners if they succeed in the Writ  Peti-
	      tion,  will not be denied houses for  want  of
	      sufficient  number  of  houses.  Therefore  40
	      houses were reserved in W.P. No. 228 of  1981.
	      The  lot to be drawn in this case	 is  amongst
	      the 40 petitioners with regard to which houses
	      should  be given not anyone else but to  those
	      who  are entitled to participate in  the	lots
	      for these 40 houses.
	      (2)  When we refer to the	 petitioners  appli-
	      cants in our order dated April 30, 1984. It is
	      clarified,    that all these persons who	have
	      moved  either  by way of	appellants  or	Writ
	      Petitioners  and who had deposited the  amount
	      and  those  who had  re-deposited	 the  amount
	      under the orders of
	      798
	      this Court and accepted by the NOIDA  authori-
	      ties  in	consonance with the  order  of	this
	      court,  all of them shall form one  class	 for
	      participating in the lot. Mr. A.M. Srivastava,
	      Court  Master should carry put the  directions
	      as  herein directed to supervise the  draw  of
	      the lot by the NOIDA authorities and  complete
	      the draw within one month from today.
			We  are satisfied that	the  persons
	      who have made the applications within the time
	      bound programme shall be entitled to  partici-
	      pate  in	the proceedings in the draw  of	 the
	      lot."
It will be noticed that though there was an order in  favour
of the 40 petitioners in Writ Petition No. 228 of 1981	that
forty  LIG-EWS houses may be released to them, there was  no
similar order in favour of the petitioners in Writ  Petition
Nos. 2292-97 of 1982 to release MIG houses in their  favour,
notwithstanding	 that they stood on the same  footing.	This
question  was considered on March 25, 1985 and an order	 was
made directing the release of five MIG houses to I.L.  Dhin-
gra,  H.K.  Bhatia. C.S. Tomar, Jagan Nath  and	 Gian  Chand
(petitioners  in  Writ Petition Nos. 2293-97 of	 1982).	 The
stay  granted by the court earlier which prevented  delivery
of  the possession of houses to persons to whom houses	were
originally  allotted was vacated. It will thus be seen	that
as  a  result of the various orders made by the	 court	from
time to time, the forty petitioners in Writ Petition No. 228
of  1981 and five petitioners in Writ Petition Nos.  2293-97
of  1982 were accommodated in the two schemes and all  those
who took advantage of the order of the court dated April 30,
1984  were  also accommodated. We do not think	that  it  is
either	possible or permissible for this court to  give	 any
further	 direction  in	these matters. The  orders  made  at
several stages of these petitions should really conclude the
matter.
    Shri  Markandeya, learned counsel for  the	petitioners,
urged  that the reservation made by NOIDA in favour of	some
of the categories of persons above-mentioned was bad.  Keep-
ing  in	 view the object of the Act under  which  NOIDA	 was
constituted,  prima  facie,  the reservation  in  favour  of
political  sufferers  and employees of	Central	 Government,
Government  of India Public Undertakings  and  International
Organisations appears to us to be bad, while reservation  in
favour	of persons whose land was been	acquired,  entrepre-
neurs and NOIDA employees and employees of NOIDA appears  to
be  sound.  Reservation in favour of  persons  belonging  to
scheduled castes, Scheduled tribes and back-
799
ward  classes was not questioned before us.  Reservation  in
favour of nominees of HUDCO was questioned but it appears to
us  to be prima facie justifiable as HUDCO is the  principal
financier of the schemes. However,. in the circumstances  of
these  cases,  we do not propose to probe further  into	 the
question  of  the validity of the reservations as  we  think
that  the petitioners in the writ petitions other than	Writ
Petition Nos. 228 of 1981 and 2293-97 of 1982 are not  enti-
tled to any relief as they cannot be said to have acted with
that  degree of promptitude which is expected in matters  of
this  nature where apart from the fact that rights of  other
parties	 intervene  straightaway when allotment is  made  in
their favour, it is not in the public interest that  housing
schemes	 etc. such as the present schemes should be kept  in
abeyance or hanging fire when the need is urgent. However by
virtue	of the orders made by the court from time  to  time,
some  of  them have been benefited by  allotment  of  houses
which  were available and such benefits as have	 accrued  to
them will stand. The petitioners in Writ Petition No. 228 of
1981 and Writ Petition Nos. 2293-97 of 1982 have been allot-
ted houses pursuant to the interim orders of this court	 and
no further orders are necessary in their case. All the	writ
petitions  are,	 therefore,  dismissed but  subject  to	 the
allotments made from time to time pursuant to the orders  of
this Court.
P.S.   S					   Petitions
dismissed.
800




