

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Smt. Poonam Lata vs M.L. Wadhawan & Ors on 22 April, 1987Equivalent citations: 1987 AIR 1383, 1987 SCR  (2)1123
Author: A Sen
Bench: Sen, A.P. (J)
           PETITIONER:
SMT. POONAM LATA

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
M.L. WADHAWAN & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT22/04/1987

BENCH:
SEN, A.P. (J)
BENCH:
SEN, A.P. (J)
MISRA RANGNATH

CITATION:
 1987 AIR 1383		  1987 SCR  (2)1123
 1987 SCC  (3) 347	  JT 1987 (2)	204
 1987 SCALE  (1)849
 CITATOR INFO :
 F	    1987 SC1748	 (30)
 F	    1987 SC2098	 (1)
 *	    1989 SC1529	 (1)


ACT:
   Conservation	 of Foreign Exchange & Prevention  of  Smug-
gling  Activities Act, 1974: ss. 3 &  12--Preventive  deten-
tion--Period of parole--Whether could be added to period  of
detention--Court whether competent to grant parole.
    Constitution  of  India; Articles 226  and	32--COFEPOSA
Act-Preventive detention--Powers of the Court to release  on
parole.
Words & Phrases: 'parole'--'detain'--Meaning of.



HEADNOTE:
    Sub-section (6) of s. 12 of the Conservation of  Foreign
Exchange  and Prevention of Smuggling Activities  Act.	1974
prohibits  release  of	a detenu on bail, or  bail  bond  or
otherwise, during the period a detention order is in  force.
Sub-sections  (1) and (1A) of s. 12, however, permit  tempo-
rary release by the Central or State Governments on  certain
terms  and  conditions. Section 10 provides  for  a  maximum
period	of detention of one year in cases .to  which  provi-
sions of s. 9 do not apply.
    The husband of the petitioner was detained under s. 3(1)
of  the Act by an order dated February 28, 1986. His  repre-
sentation  under s. 8(b) was rejected by the  detaining	 au-
thority on April 4, 1986. The Advisory Board in its sittings
on April 28 and 29, 1986 concluded that there was sufficient
cause for detention. The order of detention was confirmed by
the Minister on May 14, 1986.
    The writ petition filed under Article 32 of the  Consti-
tution on April 23, 1986 was heard by the Vacation Judge  on
May 15 1986 who made an order for the release of the  detenu
on  parole  and directed the matter to be  listed  in  early
August of 1986. The case, however, could not be listed	till
January	 14, 1987, and was finally heard on March  3,  1987.
The  detenu had been out of Jail during the  entire  period.
The period of one year expired on February 28, 1987.
1124
    It	was contended for the petitioner that the period  of
parole from May 15. 1986 till February 28. 1987 could not be
added  to  the period of detention specified  in  the  order
under sub-s. (1) of s. 3 of the Act, that the period of	 one
year  from the date of detention having expired on  February
28.  1987  the order of detention had lapsed  entitling	 the
detenu	to be freed, and that once the detenu is taken	into
custody under the Act pursuant to an order of detention	 the
running	 of  time would not be arrested merely	because	 the
court  directs the release of the detenu on parole.  Relying
on  the decision in Lala Jairam Das & Ors. v. Emperor.	(AIR
1945 PC 94) it was contended that the court cannot on gener-
al principles add the period of bail or parole to the period
of  detention,	and  that the ratio laid  down	in  Amritlal
Channumal  Jain etc. v. State of Gujarat & Ors., (W.P.	Nos.
1342-43	 of 1982 decided on July 10, 1985) that	 the  period
during	which  a detenu was on parole should be	 taken	into
account	 while	calculating the period of detention  has  to
prevail and must be taken as binding.
Dismissing the writ petition. the Court.
    HELD: 1. The period of parole of the detenu from May 15,
1986  to February 28. 1987 has to be excluded  in  reckoning
the period of his detention for one year under sub-s. (1) of
s. 3 of the Conservation of Foreign Exchange and  Prevention
of Smuggling Activities Act, 1974. [1136D, G-H]
    2.1	 The  purpose and object of s. 10 of the Act  is  to
prescribe  not	only  a maximum period for  which  a  person
against whom a detention order under the Act is made may  be
held  in actual custody pursuant to the said order but	also
the method by which the period is to be computed. The key to
the  interpretation of the section is in the words  "may  be
detained." The subsequent words "from the date of detention"
which  follow the words "maximum period of one year"  merely
define	the starting point from which the maximum period  of
detention of one year is to be reckoned in a case not  fall-
ing under s. 9. There is no justifiable reason why the	word
"detain"  should not receive its plain and  natural  meaning
'to hold in custody'. [1134B; 1133G, EP]
    2.2	 The  period during which the detenu  is  on  parole
cannot be said to be a period during which he has been	held
in custody pursuant to the order of his detention. In such a
case  he was not in actual custody. The order  of  detention
prescribes  the	 place where the detenu is to  be  detained.
Parole	brings	him out of confinement from that  place	 and
detention  as contemplated by the Act is  interrupted  until
the  detenu  is put back into custody. The  running  of	 the
period recommences then and
1125
a total period of one year has to be counted by putting	 the
different  periods  of	actual detention  together.  In	 the
instant	 case it cannot, therefore, be said that the  period
during which the detenu was on. parole has to be taken	into
consideration  in computing the maximum period of  detention
authorised by s. 10 of the Act. [1133H; 1134A-D]
    Harish  Makhija v. State of U.P., Crl. M.P. No.  620  of
1984 in W.P. (Crl.) No. 301 of 1983 decided on February	 11,
1985; State of Gujarat v. Adam Kasam Bhaya, [1982] 1 SCR 740
and  State  of Gujarat v. IsmaiI Juma & Ors., [1982]  1	 SCR
1014. referred to.
    Amritlal Channumal Jain etc. v. State of Gujarat & Ors.,
Writ  Petitions	 Nos. 1342-43 of 1982 decided  on  July	 10,
1985, distinguished.
    3.	Parole is the release of a prisoner from a penal  or
correctional  institution after he has served a part of	 his
sentence under the continuous custody of the State and under
conditions  that permit his in carceration in the  event  of
misbehavior.  It is a grant of partial liberty or  lessening
of  restrictions to a convict prisoner and does	 not  change
the status of the prisoner. [1131E, BC]
    Preventive detention is not punishment. The scheme of s.
12.  unless temporary release by the appropriate  Government
is  taken  to be one of parole, keeps away parole  from	 the
subject of preventive detention. [1130F; 1135F]
    4.1	 What in a given situation should be the  sufficient
period	for a person to be detained for the purpose  of	 the
COFEPOSA  Act is one for the subjective satisfaction of	 the
detaining  authority. Preventive detention jurisprudence  in
this  regard is very different from regular conviction	fol-
lowed by sentence that an accused is to suffer. [1134EF]
    4.2	 Whether  it  be under Art. 226 or Art.	 32  of	 the
Constitution. the Court has no jurisdiction either under the
Act or under the general principles of law or in exercise of
extraordinary jurisdiction to deal with the duration of	 the
period of detention either by abridging or enlarging it. The
only power that is available to it is to quash the order  in
case it is found to be illegal. It would not, therefore,  be
open  to  the  Court to reduce the period  of  detention  by
admitting the detenu on parole. [1134F,E]
    5.	Sub-s. (6) of s. 12 of the Act puts a statutory	 bar
to the release of the detenu after an order of detention has
been made and the detenu lodged in custody. It is the appro-
priate Government and not the Court
1126
which  deal with a case of temporary release of the   detenu
under  subss.(1)  and (1A) of s. 12 of the Act.	 The  detenu
seeking	 to have the benefit of temporary relief must go  to
the appropriate Government first. The Court cannot entertain
his  application for parole straightaway. On  the  principle
that  exercise	of administrative jurisdiction	is  open  to
Judicial review by the superior Court, the High Court  under
Art.  226  or this Court under Art. 32 may in a	 given	case
examine the legality and propriety of the Government action.
[1135E,C, F, G; 1136A; 1135H]
    Samir  Chatterjee v. State of West Bengal, [1975] 1	 SCC
801;  State of Bihar v. Rambalak Singh & Ors., [1966] 3	 SCR
344  and State of; Uttar Pradesh v. Jairam & Ors., [1982]  1
SCC 176, referred to.
    Babulal  Das v. State of West Bengal, [1975] 1 SCC	311;
Anil Dey v. State of West Bengal, [1974] 4 SCC 514 and Golam
Hussain v. Commissioner of Police, Calcutta & Ors. [1974]  4
SCC 530, overruled.
    6. It is desirable to insert in the COFEPOSA Act or	 the
Rules  made thereunder a provision like sub-s.(4) of s.	 389
of the Code of. Criminal Procedure, 1973 that when an action
is taken under s. 12 of the Act and the appropriate  Govern-
ment  makes  a	temporary release order the  order  of	such
temporary  release whether on bail or parole has to  be	 ex-
cluded	in computing the period of detention.  [1136C]	Lala
Jairam Das & Ors. y. Emperor AIR 1945 PC 94, referred to.



JUDGMENT:
ORIGINAL JURISDICTION: Writ Petition (Crl.) No. 292 of 1986.
(Under Article 32 of the Constitution of India).
    Ram Jethmalani, Ms. Rani Jethmalani and A.K. Sharma	 for
the Petitioner.
    Anil Dev Singh, Mrs. Indra Sawhney and Ms. S. Relan	 for
the Respondents.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
    SEN, J. By this petition under Article 32 of the Consti-
tution,	 the petitioner Smt. Poonam Lata has asked  for	 the
issue  of  a writ of habeas corpus for the  release  of	 her
husband, Shital Kumar who has been
1127
detained  by an order passed by the Additional Secretary  to
the Government of India, Ministry of Finance, Department  of
Revenue. dated February 28, 1986. made under section 3(1) of
Conservation of Foreign Exchange and Prevention of Smuggling
Activities Act, 1974 (hereinafter referred to as the 'Act'),
on being satisfied that it was necessary to detain him "with
a view to preventing him from dealing in smuggled goods".
    Put	 very  briefly, the essential facts are	 these.	 The
Directorate of Enforcement, New Delhi, gathered intelligence
over a period of time before making of the impugned order of
detention  which  revealed that the detenu  was	 engaged  in
receiving  smuggled gold from across the  Indo-Nepal  Border
and  was making payments in foreign currency  and  remitting
the  sale proceeds of such smuggled gold out of the  country
in  the shape of U.S. dollars with the help of carriers.  On
February 26. 1986, the Directorate received information that
the three carriers, namely, Ram Deo Thakur, Shyam Thakur and
Bhushan	 Thakur would be leaving under the assumed names  of
Dalip,	Mukesh	and Rajesh respectively by 154	Dn.  Jayanti
Janata	Express	 leaving New Delhi Railway Station  at	6.45
p.m.  Accordingly,  the officers of the Delhi  Zone  of	 the
Directorate  mounted surveillance at Platform No. 5  of	 the
Railway	 Station from which the train was to steam off.	 The
said  carriers were detrained and upon search of their	bag-
gage,  the officers recovered $ 29,750 and Rs.1500 from	 Ram
Deo Thakur @ Dalip, $ 28,900 and Rs.650 from Shyam Thakur  @
Mukesh	and  $	20,000 and Rs.1,000 from  Bhushan  Thakur  @
Rajesh.	 The  same ware seized under section 110(1)  of	 the
Customs	 Act,  1962. The total value of the  seized  foreign
currency  was  equivalent to Rs.10,25,000 in  round  figure.
During	interrogation by the officers under section  108  of
the  Customs Act, these persons stated that the seized	for-
eign currency totaling $ 78,650 had been paid by the  detenu
towards	 the  price of 48 gold biscuits	 of  foreign  origin
brought by them from Darbhanga to New Delhi and made over to
him  and  accordingly the detenu was taken into	 custody  on
February  27, 1986. He too made a statement under s. 108  of
the  Act  confessing that he was dealing  in  smuggled	gold
brought across the Indo-Nepal Border and has been  remitting
the  price  of such gold in U.S. dollars  through  different
carriers.
    On	February  28, 1986, the detenu was served  with	 the
impugned  order of detention along with the grounds  thereof
and  copies  of the relevant documents relied  upon  in	 the
grounds. On March 25, 1986. the detenu submitted a represen-
tation	under  section	8(b) of the Act	 and  the  detaining
authority by its order of April 4, 1986 rejected the
1128
same. On April 12, 1986 the detenu made a representation  to
the Advisory Board through the Superintendent of the Central
Jail,  Tihar. The representation together with	comments  of
the  detaining	authority and the  relevant  documents	were
forwarded by the Ministry of Finance, Department of  Revenue
to the Advisory Board. On the same day the detenu appears to
have made a representation to the Central Government and  it
was  received in the Ministry of Finance on April 24,  1986.
The  Minister of State for Finance rejected the said  repre-
sentation  on  April 28, 1986 and the  detenu  was  informed
about  it  the	following day. The Advisory  Board  had	 its
sittings  on April 28 and 29, 1986. and came to the  conclu-
sion  that there was sufficient cause for the detention	 and
sent its report on May 8, 1986. The Minister considered	 the
report	of  the Advisory Board and confirmed  the  order  of
detention on May-14, 1986 and the Central Government's order
of confirmation was duly communicated on May 26, 1986.
    The	 representation of the detenu was still	 before	 the
Advisory  Board when the petitioner moved this	Court  under
Article	 32 of the Constitution on April 23, 1986. On  April
29, 1986, notice was ordered by the Court returnable on	 May
3,  1986,  and	it directed that the matter  may  be  placed
before the Vacation Judge on May 15, 1986. On that date, the
learned Vacation Judge made an order for the release of	 the
detenu on parole in the following terms:-
	      "The  detenu is released on parole until	fur-
	      ther  orders  on the condition  that  he	will
	      report to the Directorate of Revenue  Intelli-
	      gence, New Delhi every day and the Directorate
	      will  be at liberty to ask him to explain	 his
	      conduct during this time.
			Reply affidavit may be filed  within
	      two weeks. The matter will be listed two weeks
	      after  reopening	of the	Court  after  summer
	      vacation.
		       In the meantime, the respondents will
	      be  at liberty to make an application for	 the
	      revocation of the parole if any misconduct  or
	      any other activity comes to their notice
	      which requires the revocation of the parole."
		  Notwithstanding  the order of the  learned
	      Vacation	Judge  that  the  matter  should  be
	      listed  within two weeks after the  re-opening
	      of  the  Court  after  the  long	vacation--it
	      should have been some time in early August  of
	      1986--the case was not listed till January 14,
	      1987. The
	      1129
	      respondents  also took no steps to  apply	 for
	      early  listing of the matter. On	January	 14,
	      1987, a prayer was made by the learned counsel
	      appearing	 for the Union of India seeking	 two
	      weeks'  time to file an  additional  affidavit
	      and the case was ordered to be listed on March
	      3.  1987. During all these months, the  detenu
	      has been out of jail.
		  Indisputably	the  detention was  for	 one
	      year.  When the matter came up for hearing  on
	      the  3rd	of  March,  1987,  Shri	 Jethmalani,
	      learned  counsel for the	petitioner  confined
	      his  submissions to only one  aspect,  namely,
	      that  the period of parole i.e. from  May	 15,
	      1986  till  February 28, 1987,  could  not  be
	      added to the period of detention specified  in
	      the impugned order under sub-s. (1) of s. 3 of
	      the  Act and the period of one year  from	 the
	      date  of detention having expired on  February
	      26,  1987, the impugned order had	 lapsed	 and
	      the  detenu became entitled to be	 freed	from
	      the  shackles of the order of  detention.	 Ac-
	      cording to the learned counsel, section 10  of
	      the  Act	prescribes  the	 maximum  period  of
	      detention to be one year or two years, as	 the
	      case may be, from the date of detention or the
	      specified	 period, whichever expires  earlier.
	      Admittedly in respect of the detenu no  decla-
	      ration  under  section 9 of the Act  has	been
	      made  and,  therefore, the maximum  period  of
	      detention	 so  far as he is concerned  is	 one
	      year  and it has to be reckoned as  prescribed
	      under  section  10 of the	 Act.  That  section
	      indicates not only the starting point but also
	      the outer limit. In other words, the  argument
	      is that once the detenu is taken into  custody
	      under  the Act pursuant to an order of  deten-
	      tion, the running of time would not be arrest-
	      ed merely because the Court directs release of
	      the detenu on parole.
		  Shri Jethmalani drew a distinction between
	      'bail' and 'parole'; he contended that preven-
	      tive  detention was not a sentence by  way  of
	      punishment  and,	therefore,  the	 concept  of
	      serving out which pertains to punitive  juris-
	      prudence cannot be imported into the realm  of
	      preventive  detention. According to  him,	 the
	      grant  of	 parole	 to a detenu  amounts  to  a
	      provisional release from confinement; yet	 the
	      detenu  continues to be under judicial  deten-
	      tion;  release  from jail custody	 subject  to
	      restrictions  imposed on free  and  unfettered
	      movement	transfers  the	detenu	to  judicial
	      custody. Since there is no provision to autho-
	      rise interruption of running of the period  of
	      detention,  release on parole does  not  bring
	      about  any  change in the	 situation.  It	 has
	      further been argued that when the Court enter-
	      tains  a	writ petition for  grant  of  habeas
	      corpus  and issues a rule nisi, the detenu  is
	      deemed to have come into judicial custody	 and
	      the effect of grant of parole does not  termi-
	      nate  such custody but merely  allows  greater
	      freedom of move-
	      1130
	      ment to the detenu. Conditions imposed on	 the
	      detenu during parole impinge upon his  freedom
	      and  liberty;  therefore,	 the  period  during
	      which a detenu is released on parole cannot be
	      taken  as a period during which the  detention
	      is  not  operative.  Shri	 Jethmalani   placed
	      reliance	on  the ratio of the  Privy  Council
	      decision in Lala Jairam Das & Ors. v. Emperor,
	      AIR  1945	 PC 94 to contend that but  for	 the
	      special provision contained in sub-section (3)
	      of  s. 426 of the old Code of Criminal  Proce-
	      dure, 1898 (corresponding to s. 389(4) of	 the
	      Code of 1973) the power of the Court to  grant
	      bail  to a convicted person or  accused  would
	      not  include a power to exclude the period  of
	      bail  from the term of the sentence. The	same
	      principle	 ought to apply in the case  of	 re-
	      lease  of a detenu on bail or parole  and	 the
	      Court  therefore cannot on general  principles
	      add the period of bail or parole to the period
	      of detention. In the absence of any  provision
	      regarding the grant of parole and the computa-
	      tion of the period thereof and in view of	 the
	      special  provisions contained  regarding	com-
	      mencement and the computation of the period of
	      detention	 of one year, the period  of  parole
	      cannot be deducted while computing the  period
	      of one year of detention. The learned  counsel
	      also relied upon the direction made by a Bench
	      of three Judges in the case of Amritlal  Chan-
	      numal  Jain  etc. v. State of Gujarat  &	Ors.
	      (Writ Petitions Nos. 1342-43, 1345-48 and 1362
	      of  1982	and No. 162 of 1983 dated  July	 10,
	      1985)  where  this  Court	 directed  that	 the
	      period  during  which a detenu was  on  parole
	      should be taken into account while calculating
	      the  total period of detention.  According  to
	      learned  counsel	the  direction	in  Amritlal
	      Channumal Jain's case was given after a  Bench
	      of  two Judges in Harish Makhija v.  State  of
	      U.P. Crl. M.P. No. 620 of 1984 in U.P.  (Crl.)
	      No.  301	of 1983 held on February  11,  1985,
	      that  the period of parole cannot	 be  counted
	      towards the period of detention. Shri Jethmal-
	      ani  has submitted that in view of the  direc-
	      tion  of the larger Bench of this	 Court,	 the
	      ratio  laid down in Amritlal Channumal  Jain's
	      case (supra) has to prevail and must be  taken
	      as binding on us.
		  There is no denying the fact that  preven-
	      tive  detention  is  not	punishment  and	 the
	      concept  of serving out a sentence  would	 not
	      legitimately be within the purview of  preven-
	      tive detention. The grant of parole is  essen-
	      tially an executive function and instances  of
	      release  of detenus on parole  were  literally
	      unknown until this Court and some of the	High
	      Courts in India in recent years made orders of
	      release  on parole on humanitarian  considera-
	      tions.  Historically  'parole'  is  a  concept
	      known to military law and denotes release of a
	      prisoner	of war on promise to return.  Parole
	      has become an integral part of the English and
	      American	systems of criminal  justice  inter-
	      twined  with the evolution of  changing  atti-
	      tudes of the society towards crime and  crimi-
	      nals.
	      1131
	      As a consequence of the introduction of parole
	      into  the	 penal system, all  fixed-term	sen-
	      tences of imprisonment of above 18 months	 are
	      subject to release on licence, that is, parole
	      after  a third of the period of  sentence	 has
	      been  served.  In those countries,  parole  is
	      taken  as an act of grace and not as a  matter
	      of  right	 and  the convict  prisoner  may  be
	      released	on condition that he abides  by	 the
	      promise.	It  is a  provisional  release	from
	      confinement but is deemed to be a part of	 the
	      imprisonment.  Release on parole is a wing  of
	      the  reformative	process and is	expected  to
	      provide opportunity to the prisoner to  trans-
	      form himself into a useful citizen. Parole  is
	      thus  a grant of partial liberty or  lessening
	      of  restrictions	to a convict  prisoner,	 but
	      release  on parole does not change the  status
	      of  the prisoner. Rules are  flamed  providing
	      supervision  by  parole  authorities  of	 the
	      convicts	released  on parole and in  case  of
	      failure  to perform the promise,	the  convict
	      released on parole is directed to surrender to
	      custody.	(See: The Oxford Companion  to	Law,
	      edited  by Walker, 1980 edn., p. 931,  Black's
	      Law  Dictionary, 5th edn., p.  1006,  Jowitt's
	      Dictionary  of English Law, 2nd edn., Vol.  2,
	      p.  1320,	 Kenny's Outlines of  Criminal	Law,
	      17th  edn., p. 574-76, The English  Sentencing
	      System by Sir Rupert Cross at pp. 31-34, 87 et
	      seq.,  American Jurisprudence, 2nd edn.,	Vol.
	      59, pp. 53-61, Corpus Juris Secundum, vol. 67,
	      Probation and Parole, Legal and Social  Dimen-
	      sions  by	 Louis P. Carney). It  follows	from
	      these  authorities that parole is the  release
	      of  a very long term prisoner from a penal  or
	      correctional institution after he has served a
	      part  of	his sentence  under  the  continuous
	      custody of the State and under conditions that
	      permit  his  incarceration  in  the  event  of
	      misbehavior.
		  There is abundance of authority that	High
	      Courts in exercise of their jurisdiction under
	      Article 226 of the Constitution do not release
	      a detenu on bail or parole. There is no reason
	      why a different view should be taken in regard
	      to  exercise of jurisdiction under Article  32
	      of  the  Constitution  particularly  when	 the
	      power  to	 grant relief to a  detenu  in	such
	      proceedings is exercisable on very narrow	 and
	      limited grounds. In State of Bihar v. Rambalak
	      Singh & Ors., [1966] 3 SCR 344 a	Constitution
	      Bench  laid down that the release of a  detenu
	      placed  under detention under Rule 30  of	 the
	      Defence of India Rules, 1962. on bail  pending
	      the hearing of a petition for grant of a	writ
	      of  habeas corpus was an improper exercise  of
	      jurisdiction;  It	 was observed in  that	case
	      that  if the High Court was of the  view	that
	      prima  facie the impugned order  of  detention
	      was  patently  illegal  in that  there  was  a
	      serious defect in the order of detention which
	      would  justify the release of the detenu,	 the
	      proper and more sensible and reasonable course
	      would invariably be to expedite the hearing of
	      the writ petition and
	      1132
	      deal with the merits without any delay  rather
	      than  direct  release of the detenu  on  bail.
	      Again,  in State of Uttar Pradesh v. Jairam  &
	      Ors.,  [1982]  1 SCC 176 a  three-Judge  Bench
	      speaking through Chandrachud, CJ., referred to
	      Rambalak Singh's case and set aside the  order
	      passed by the learned Single Judge of the High
	      Court  admitting	the detenu to  bail  on	 the
	      ground  that  it was an improper	exercise  of
	      jurisdiction.  As	 to grant of parole,  it  is
	      worthy of note that in none of the cases	this
	      Court made a direction under Article 32 of the
	      Constitution for grant of parole to the detenu
	      but  left	 it  to the  executive	to  consider
	      whether  it should make an order in  terms  of
	      the  relevant provision for temporary  release
	      of the person detained as under section 12  of
	      the  COFEPOSA, in the facts and  circumstances
	      of  a particular case. In Samir Chatterjee  v.
	      State  of West Bengal, [1975] 1 SCC  801,	 the
	      Court set aside the order of the Calcutta High
	      Court  releasing on parole a  person  detained
	      under  S. 3(1) of the Maintenance of  Internal
	      Security	Act, 1971 and  unequivocally  viewed
	      with disfavor the observations made by Krishna
	      Iyer,  J.	 in  Babulal Das v.  State  of	West
	      Bengal, [1975] 1 SCC 311 to the effect:
	      "While  discharging the rule issued  and	dis-
	      missing  the  petition, we wish  to  emphasize
	      that  s.	15  is often lost sight	 of  by	 the
	      Government  in such situations, as  long	term
	      preventive detention can be self-defeating  or
	      criminally   counter-productive.	Section	  15
	      reads:
	      15. Temporary release of persons detained--
	      We consider that it is fair that persons	kept
	      incarcerated  and	 embittered  without   trial
	      should  be given some chance to  reform  them-
	      selves  by reasonable recourse to	 the  parole
	      power  under s. 15. Calculated risks,  by	 re-
	      lease  for  short periods may, perhaps,  be  a
	      social gain, the beneficent jurisdiction being
	      wisely exercised."
    Alagiriswamy, J. speaking for the Court, observed in  no
uncertain terms:
1133
	      "We  fail to see that these  observations	 lay
	      down  any principle of law. Section 15  merely
	      confers  a power on the Government. The  power
	      and  duty	 of this Court is  to  decide  cases
	      coming before it according to law. In so doing
	      it  may take various considerations  into	 ac-
	      count. But to advise the Government as to	 how
	      they should exercise their functions or powers
	      conferred	 on  them by statute is not  one  of
	      this  Court's  functions. Where the  Court  is
	      able to give effect to its view in the form of
	      a valid and binding order that is a  different
	      matter.  Furthermore,  section 15	 deals	with
	      release on parole and there is nothing to show
	      that the petitioner applied for to be released
	      on parole for any specific purpose. As far  as
	      we are able to see, release on parole is	made
	      only  on	the request of the party and  for  a
	      specific purpose."
The  innovative view expressed by Krishna lyer, J.  in	Anil
Dey  v.	 State of West Bengal, [1974] 4 SCC 5  14  which  he
tried  to reiterate in Golam Hussain v. The Commissioner  of
Police,	 Calcutta  & Ors., [1974] 4 SCC 530 and	 in  Babulal
Das'  case, (supra), therefore, no longer holds	 the  field,
and rightly so, because the Court cannot usurp the functions
of the Government.
 Section  10 of the Act provides that the maximum  period
for  which  any person may be detained in  pursuance  of  an
order  of detention to which provisions of section 9 do	 not
apply  shall  be for a period of one year from the  date  of
detention or the specified period, whichever expires  earli-
er.  The key to the interpretation of section 10 of the	 Act
is  in	the words 'may be detained'.  The  subsequent  words
'from the date of detention' which follow the words 'maximum
period	of one year' merely define the starting	 point	from
which  the maximum period of detention of one year is to  be
reckoned in a case not falling. under section 9. There is no
justifiable reason why the word 'detain' should not  receive
its  plain  and natural meaning. According  to	the  Shorter
Oxford English Dictionary, vol. 1, p. 531, the word 'detain'
means "to keep in confinement or custody". Webster's Campre-
hensive	 Dictionary, International Edition at p.  349  gives
the meaning as "to hold in custody". The purpose and  object
of s. 10 is to prescribe a maximum period for which a person
against whom a detention order under the Act is made may  be
held in actual custody pursuant to the said order. It  would
not be violated if a person against whom an order of  deten-
tion  is  passed is held in actual custody in jail  for	 the
period	prescribed by the section. The period  during  which
the detenu is on parole cannot be
1134
said to be a period during which he has been held in custody
pursuant  to the order of his detention, for in such a	case
he  was not in actual custody. The order of  detention	pre-
scribes the place where the detenu is to be detained. Parole
brings him out of confinement from that place. Whatever	 may
be  the	 terms and conditions imposed for grant	 of  parole,
detention  as  contemplated by the Act is  interrupted	when
release	 on parole is obtained. The position would  be	well
met by the appropriate answer to the question "how long	 has
the  detenu been in actual custody pursuant to	the  order?"
According to its plain construction, the purpose and  object
of s. 10 is to prescribe not only for the maximum period but
also  the method by which the period is to be computed.	 The
computation  has  to  commence from the date  on  which	 the
detenu is taken into actual custody but if it is interrupted
by an order of parole, the detention would not continue when
parole operates and until the detenu is put back into custo-
dy.  The running of the period recommences then and a  total
period of one year has to be counted by putting the  differ-
ent periods of actual detention together. We see no force in
Shri  Jethmalani's submission that the period  during  which
the detenu was on parole has to be taken into  consideration
in  computing the maximum period of detention authorised  by
section 10 of the Act.
    It	is pertinent to observe that the Court has no  power
to substitute the period of detention either by abridging or
enlarging it. The only power that is available to the  Court
is  to	quash the order in case it is found to	be  illegal.
That  being so, it would not be open to the Court to  reduce
the  period of detention by admitting the detenu on  parole.
What  in a given situation should be the  sufficient  period
for  a person to be detained for the purpose of the  Act  is
one for the subjective satisfaction of the detaining author-
ity.  Preventive detention jurisprudence in this  regard  is
very different from regular conviction followed by  sentence
that  an accused is to suffer. Whether it be  under  Article
226  or	 Article 32 of the Constitution,  the  Court  would,
therefore,  have  no jurisdiction either under	the  Act  or
under  the general principles of law or in exercise  of	 ex-
traordinary  jurisdiction to deal with the duration  of	 the
period of detention.
    Parliament has authorised the detention of persons under
the COFEPOSA to serve two purposes:-
	      "(1)  To	prevent the  person  concerned	from
	      engaging himself in an activity prejudicial to
	      the conservation of foreign exchange and	also
	      preventing him from smuggling activities
	      1135
	      and  thereby  to render him immobile  for	 the
	      period  considered necessary by the  detaining
	      authority	 so  that  during  that	 period	 the
	      society  is  protected from  such	 prejudicial
	      activities on the part of the detenu. And
	      (2)  In order to break the links	between	 the
	      person  so  engaged  and the  source  of	such
	      activity	and from his associates	 engaged  in
	      that  activity or to break the  continuity  of
	      such  prejudicial activities so that it  would
	      become  difficult, if not impossible, for	 him
	      to resume the activities."
Release	 of a detenu on parole after an order  of  detention
has been made and the detenu lodged in custody for achieving
one  or	 the other of the aforesaid legislative	 objects  is
thus  contrary	to the purpose of the statute.	There  is  a
statutory prohibition against release of a detenu during the
period of detention in sub-section (6) of section 12 of	 the
Act. That sub-section which was inserted by Amending Act  39
of 1975 with effect from 1.7.1975 reads:-
	      "Notwithstanding	anything  contained  in	 any
	      other  law and save as otherwise	provided  in
	      this section, no person against whom a  deten-
	      tion  order  made under this Act is  in  force
	      shall be released whether on bail or bail bond
	      or otherwise."
Sub-section  (6) puts a statutory bar to the release of	 the
detenu during the period of detention in a manner  otherwise
than  the one provided in section 12. Section 12  authorises
either	the  Central Government or the State  Government  to
temporarily release the detenu on such terms and  conditions
as the appropriate Government considers necessary to impose.
The scheme of section 12, unless release by the	 appropriate
Government  is taken to be one of parole, keeps away  parole
from the subject of preventive detention. At any rate, it is
the  appropriate  Government and not the Court	which  deals
with  a case of temporary release of the detenu.  Since	 the
Act  authorises the appropriate Government to make an  order
of temporary release, invariably the detenu seeking to	have
the  benefit of temporary relief must go to the	 appropriate
Government  first. It may be that in a given case the  Court
may  be	 required to consider the propriety  of	 an  adverse
order  by  the Government in exercise  of  the	jurisdiction
under section 12 of the Act. On the principle that exercise'
of administrative jurisdiction is open to judicial review by
the superior court, the High Court under Article 226 or this
Court under Article 32 may be called upon in a suitable case
to
1136
examine	 the  legality	and propriety  of  the	governmental
action.	 There is no scope for entertaining  an	 application
for  parole  by	 the  Court  straightaway.  The	 legislative
scheme, keeping the purpose of the statute and the manner of
its fulfilment provided thereunder, would not justify enter-
taining of an application for release of a detenu on parole.
Since  in  our	view release on parole is not  a  matter  of
judicial determination, apparently no provision as contained
in  the Code of Criminal Procedure relating to the  computa-
tion of the period of bail was thought necessary in the Act.
But we would like to point out to the Government the desira-
bility of inserting a provision like sub-s.(4) of s. 389  of
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 that when an action  is
taken  under section 12 of the Act and the appropriate	Gov-
ernment makes a temporary release order, the period of	such
temporary  release whether on bail or parole has to  be	 ex-
cluded	in  computing the period of  detention.	 Either	 the
statute or the rules made thereunder should provide for this
eventuality.
    In	the premises, it must accordingly be held  that	 the
period of parole has to be excluded in reckoning the  period
of detention under sub-section (1) of section 3 of the	Act.
We  find  it  difficult from the observations  made  by	 the
three-Judge Bench in Amritlal Channumal Jain's case to infer
a  direction by this Court that the period of  parole  shall
not  be	 added to the period of detention.  The	 words	used
'shall	be taken into account' are susceptible of an  inter-
pretation  to the contrary. We find that an order made by  a
bench  of two Judges of this Court in Harish Makhija's	case
(supra)	 unequivocally laid down that the period  of  parole
cannot	be  counted towards the period	of  detention.	This
accords with the view taken by this Court in a bench of	 two
Judges in State of Gujarat v. Adam Kasam Bhaya, [1982] 1 SCR
740 and State of Gujarat v. Ismail Juma & Ors., [1982] 1 SCR
1014.  In  view of these authorities which appear to  be  in
consonance  with the object and purpose of the Act  and	 the
statutory provisions and also having regard to the fact that
the direction made in Amritlal Channumal Jain's case (supra)
is  capable of another construction as well, we do not	find
Shri Jethmalani's contention on this score as acceptable.
    For these reasons, the only contention advanced by	Shri
Jethmalani in course of the hearing, namely, that the period
of  parole from May 15, 1986 to February 28, 1987 could	 not
be  added to the maximum period of detention of	 the  detenu
Shital Kumar for one year as specified in the impugned order
of detention passed under sub-s.(1) of s. 3 of the Conserva-
tion  of Foreign Exchange & Prevention of Smuggling  Activi-
ties Act, 1974, must fail. The writ petition is accordingly
1137
dismissed.  There shall be no order as to costs.  We  direct
that  the petitioner shall surrender to custody	 to  undergo
remaining period of detention. We give the detenu ten  days'
time  to  comply with this direction failing  which  a	non-
bailable warrant for his arrest shall issue.
P.S.S.					     Petition	dis-
missed.
1138




