

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Kansa Behera vs State Of Orissa on 12 April, 1987Equivalent citations: 1987 AIR 1507, 1987 SCR  (2)1096
Author: G Oza
Bench: Oza, G.L. (J)
           PETITIONER:
KANSA BEHERA

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF ORISSA

DATE OF JUDGMENT12/04/1987

BENCH:
OZA, G.L. (J)
BENCH:
OZA, G.L. (J)
KHALID, V. (J)

CITATION:
 1987 AIR 1507		  1987 SCR  (2)1096
 1987 SCC  (3) 480	  JT 1987 (2)	193
 1987 SCALE  (1)1137
 CITATOR INFO :
 E	    1991 SC1853	 (10)


ACT:
    Indian Penal Code-Section 302--Conviction on circumstan-
tial  evidence--When  valid--Circumstance of  accused  being
with  the  deceased on the  evening  of	 occurrence--Whether
sufficient to convict accused.
    Indian  Evidence Act, 1872--Sections 3  and	 14--Circum-
stantial  evidence-Conviction based on--When  valid--Circum-
stance	of  accused being with deceased on  the	 evening  of
occurrence--Whether sufficient when other accused from	whom
instrument of offence recovered is acquitted.



HEADNOTE:
    The prosecution alleged that the deceased had some	land
dispute	 with one of the accused and his two brothers,	that
the  deceased was done away through the	 instrumentality  of
the  appellant	and that his body with the  throat  cut	 was
found  by the road-side. The brother-in-law of the  deceased
identified  the	 dead body and lodged information  with	 the
police.	 After	investigation, the appellant and  the  other
accused were arrested. The weapon of offence was produced by
the  other accused. Both the accused were remanded to  judi-
cial  custody  for the alleged murder of the  deceased.	 The
appellant  escaped and was declared as absconder. The  other
accused was discharged for want of prima facie case  against
him.
    After a long lapse of time, the appellant was apprehend-
ed  and was committed to sessions. On the basis	 of  circum-
stantial  evidence  that  the appellant was  seen  with	 the
deceased  on  the  evening preceding the day  on  which	 the
deceased  was  found dead, that a dhoti and  shirt,  stained
with human blood, were recovered from his possession when he
was arrested and that an extra-judicial confession was	made
by  him when he was arrested after absconding, he  was	con-
victed	under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code and	sen-
tenced	to  imprisonment  for life. The	 High  Court  having
confirmed  the	conviction and sentence, the  appellant	 ap-
pealed to this Court.
Allowing the appeal by special leave,
1097
    HELD: 1. It is a settled rule of circumstantial evidence
that  each  one of the circumstances has to  be	 established
beyond	doubt  and all the circumstances put  together	must
lead  to the only inference and that is of the guilt of	 the
accused. [1101E]
    2.1(a) It is not in dispute that the appellant was	seen
with  the deceased on the evening preceding the	 night	when
the  deceased is alleged to have been killed. This fact	 has
been  established by the evidence of P.Ws. 3 and 4  and	 the
appellant himself has admitted it, even though his caSe	 Was
that  the  throat of the deceased was cut by the  other	 ac-
cused.	Even the wife of the deceased has deposed  that	 the
appellant  had told her that her husband was lying dead.  It
is  clear  that only on the basis of this  circumstance	 the
appellant could not have been convicted. [1099C-D]
    2.1(b)  As	regards recovery of a shirt and	 dhoti	with
blood  stains,	there is no evidence in the  report  of	 the
Serologist  about the blood group and, therefore,  the	evi-
dence  could not positively be connected with the  deceased.
The  evidence of blood group is only conclusive	 to  connect
the  blood stains with the deceased. In the absence of	such
evidence,  this could not be a circumstance on the basis  of
which any inference could be drawn. [110lB-D]
    2.1(c)  Regarding the extra-judicial confession  by	 the
appellant,  made  after a long lapse of	 time,	no  reliance
could  be  placed on it, especially in view of	the  circum-
stances	 in  which  the appellant was  apprehended  and	 the
statement made, and also because of the denial by one of the
two  witnesses	that the appellant had made  by	 confession.
[1100F-1101A]
    2.2	 The only circumstances which could be said to	have
been established is of the appellant being with the deceased
in the evening and on that circumstance alone the  inference
of guilt could not be drawn especially in the  circumstances
of  the case where another accused person from whom  an	 in-
strument  of  offence  was recovered and who  had  a  grudge
against the deceased, had been let off. [1101F]
    3. The conviction and sentence passed against the appel-
lant are set aside. [1101G]



JUDGMENT:
    CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 323
of 1978.
1098
    From the Judgment and Order dated 9.3.1976 of the Orissa
High Court in Criminal Appeal No. 1 of 1974.
N.K. Agarwal for the Appellant.
Ms. Mona Mehta and R.K. Mehta for the Respondent.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
    OZA, J. This appeal has been filed after obtaining leave
from  this  Court by the appellant  against  his  conviction
under  Section	302 and sentence of  imprisonment  for	life
awarded by Sessions Judge, Mayurbharj, Kenjhar, Baripada  by
his  order  dated 8th December 1973 and maintained  by	High
Court of Orissa by its judgment dated 9th March, 1976.
    The	 prosecution  case in short was	 that  the  deceased
Bhatal Majhi had some land dispute with Jitrai Majhi and his
brothers. It is alleged that Jitrai Majhi did away with	 the
deceased  through the instrumentality of the present  appel-
lant. The incident is alleged to be at the night intervening
between 13th and 14th December 1968. Bhatal Majhi was  found
dead in the morning of 14th December, 1968 by the  road-side
near a weekly market known as Joka Hata with his throat cut.
Bishnu	Majhi  the  brother-in-law of the  deceased  P.W.  1
identified  the	 dead  body and lodged	the  information  to
Bangriposi Police Station the same day Ext. 3. The assailant
was reported to be unknown.
    P.W. 10, the Second Officer attached to the said  Police
Station	 investigated into the case, held an  inquest,	des-
patched	 the  dead-body for post-morten	 examination  seized
certain	 incriminating	articles and  finally  arrested	 the
appellant  on  15.12.68	 at 11 a.m The same day	 3  a.m.  he
arrested accused Jitrai Majhi. The weapon of offence a razor
M.O.  IV  was  produced by accused Jitrai  Majhi  which	 was
seized under Ext. 5 Investigating Officer, P.W. 10 forwarded
both  the  accused Jitrai Majhi and  Kansa  Behera,  present
appellant, in custody to Court, the appellant escaped as the
lock up was defective and he,could not be traced. Finally  a
charge	sheet  was submitted against both Jitrai  and  Kansa
indicating the appellant as absconder. Jitrai was discharged
by  the Sub Divisional Magistrate, Baripada vide  his  order
dated 27.2.1970 for want of prima facie case as against him.
So  the case as against him needs no  consideration.  Later,
after  the apprehension of the appellant on 22.8.72, he	 was
committed to the Court of Sessions on 28.6. 1973.
1099
    The	 prosecution  examined 10 witnesses and	 nobody	 was
examined  in defence. There is no eye-witness of  the  inci-
dent.  The learned courts below convicted the  appellant  on
the  basis  of circumstantial  evidence.  The  circumstances
established  against the appellant are: i) that he was	last
seen with the deceased on the evening of 13th Dec. 1968 when
it is alleged that he and deceased took liquor together; ii)
that a dhoti and shirt were recovered from the possession of
the  appellant	when he was arrested on 15.12.68  and  these
articles were found to be stained with human blood; and iii)
that  P.Ws 7 and 8 have deposed to about  an  extra-judicial
confession  made  by this appellant when he  was  ultimately
arrested after absconding in Bihar.
    So far as the first circumstance that the appellant	 was
seen  with the deceased on the evening preceding  the  night
when  the deceased is alleged to have been killed is not  in
dispute.  This fact has been established by the evidence  of
PWs 3 and 4 and the appellant himself in his statement	also
admitted  that he was there although his case was  that	 the
deceased  throat  was cut by Jitrai Majhi who  also  was  an
accused and was discharged on the basis of police papers  by
the  Sub , Divisional Magistrate. It is clear that  only  on
the basis of this circumstances the appellant could not have
been  convicted and as this circumstance is not in  dispute,
in  our opinion, it is not necessary to go into	 this  ques-
tion.
    Learned  counsel appearing for the	appellant  contended
that  the circumstances appearing in evidence indicate	that
the  deceased and Jitrai Mejhi had some trouble about  land.
It is alleged that the deceased land was pledged with Jitrai
and  the possession of the land was given to him.  When	 the
deceased  offered him to repay the loan so that he  may	 get
back  his  land, it is alleged that Jitrai refused  to	give
possession  on the plea that the land was purchased by	him.
Ultimately  it	is alleged that the deceased  took  forcible
possession of the land from Jitrai and therefore Jitrai bore
a  grudge against the deceased. It was also  contended	that
the  razor, the alleged instrument of offence was  recovered
at the instance of Jitrai when he was arrested and that	 was
also  found stained with blood. It was contended by  learned
counsel	 that  in fact the appellant's case is that  it	 was
Jitrai	who cut the throat of the deceased and this also  is
born out from a circumstance that next morning the appellant
went to the wife of the deceased and informed her that their
husband was lying dead at the place of occurrence.
    It	was also contended by learned counsel that  the	 two
witnesses who deposed about the dying declaration are P.Ws 7
and 8 but in fact
1100
P.W. 8 in cross-examination has gone back on that statement.
It contended that even otherwise the dying declaration is  a
weak piece of evidence.
    As	regards the recovery of a shirt and dhoti which	 are
alleged	 to  be stained with human blood, it  was  contended
that there is no clear evidence to indicate that the  appel-
lant  was  wearing  dhoti at the time of  the  incident.  As
regards shirt it was Contended that although the  serologist
report	indicate  that it is stained with  human  blood	 but
blood grouping is not there. In this view of the matter	 the
presence of some stains of human blood after sometime  could
not  be a circumstance on the basis of which any  conclusive
inference could be drawn. It was therefore contended that in
view  of these circumstances it could not be held  that	 the
circumstances  point to the only conclusion of the guilt  of
the appellant.
    It is significant that the wife of the deceased who	 has
been  examined	as a witness deposed that next	morning	 the
appellant  went	 to her and told her that  her	husband	 was
lying  dead,  but she did not believe him and  later  Phudan
Majhi came and told her that her husband was ill and  wanted
her to accompany him without taking food and she stated that
she went alongwith him and found her husband lying dead with
his throat cut. It is interesting that this Phudan Majhi who
came and told her a false story has not been examined.
    The three circumstances on the basis of which the appel-
lant has been convicted have to be considered. The last	 one
i,e.  the extra judicial confession is proved by P.Ws 7	 and
8.  A perusal of the evidence of P.W. 8 discloses that	this
witness	 in cross-examination went back and denied any	con-
fession having been made by the appellant. The other witness
is  P.W. 7 who no doubt has spoken about  an  extra-judicial
confession made by the appellant. This is after a long lapse
of  time  as admittedly this appellant absconded  after	 his
arrest	on  15.12.68 and was later arrested on	22.8.72	 and
this  extra-judicial  confession therefore appears  to	have
been made after a long lapse of time. The circumstances	 .in
which  this appellant was apprehended and this statement  is
alleged	 to  have been made also is rather  interesting.  In
Bihar  this appellant was apprehended for  having  committed
theft  and  that he was produced before the Mukhiya  of	 the
Village	 P.W. 7 and the Mukhia wanted him to be handed	over
to  the police. That it is alleged that the  appellant	said
that  I am wanted in connection with a murder case and I  am
hiding	from  the police and therefore requested not  to  be
handed	over  to  the police and in this  background  it  is
alleged	 that  he made a statement that he  has	 killed	 one
Bhatal Majhi.
1101
    Such an extra-judicial confession for proving which	 two
witnesses  were	 produced. One of these witnesses  has	gone
back on that statement and this statement is alleged to have
been  made after a long lapse of time, in our opinion, is  a
piece  of evidence on which no reliance could be placed	 and
under  these  circumstances, in our opinion, this  piece  of
evidence has to be left out of consideration.
    As regards the recovery of a shirt or a dhoti with blood
stains which according to the serologist report were stained
with  human blood but there is no evidence in the report  of
the serologist about the group of the blood and therefore it
could not positively be connected with the deceased. In	 the
evidence  of the Investigating Officer or in the report,  it
is  not clearly mentioned as to what were the dimensions  of
the stains of blood. Few small blood stains on the cloths of
a person may even be of his own blood especially if it is  a
villager  putting on these clothes and living  in  villages.
The  evidence  about the blood group is only  conclusive  to
connect the blood stains with the deceased. That evidence is
absent and in this view of the matter, in our opinion,	even
this is not a circumstance on the basis of which any  infer-
ence could be drawn.
    So	far as the appellant being with the deceased in	 the
evening	 is concerned, it is not in dispute. But it is	also
significant that the instrument of the offence was recovered
at the instance of one Jitrai Majhi who has been  discharged
and  under these circumstances therefore the evidence  about
the  appellant	having	been seen in the  evening  with	 the
deceased also is of no consequence. It is a settled rule  of
circumstantial	evidence that each one of the  circumstances
have  to  be established beyond doubt and  all	the  circum-
stances put together must lead to the only one inference and
that is-of the guilt of the accused. As discussed above	 the
only  circumstance which could be said to have	been  estab-
lished is of his being with the deceased in the evening	 and
on that circumstance alone the inference of guilt could	 not
be  drawn especially in the circumstances of the case  where
one  another accused person from whom an instrument  of	 of-
fence  was recovered, who had a grudge against the  deceased
has been let off.
    In the light of the discussions above therefore, in	 our
opinion,  the  courts  below were wrong	 in  convicting	 the
appellant  on these facts. The appeal is therefore  allowed,
the conviction and sentence passed against the appellant are
set aside. It is reported that he is in custody. He shall be
set at liberty forthwith.
N.P.V.					     Appeal allowed.
1102




