

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
State Of Haryana vs Uttam Alias Cheaku on 21 April, 1987Equivalent citations: 1987 SCR  (2)1064, 1987 SCC  (3) 485
Author: V B Eradi
Bench: Eradi, V. Balakrishna (J)
           PETITIONER:
STATE OF HARYANA

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
UTTAM ALIAS CHEAKU

DATE OF JUDGMENT21/04/1987

BENCH:
ERADI, V. BALAKRISHNA (J)
BENCH:
ERADI, V. BALAKRISHNA (J)
SEN, A.P. (J)

CITATION:
 1987 SCR  (2)1064	  1987 SCC  (3) 485
 JT 1987 (2)   336	  1987 SCALE  (1)1177


ACT:
   Indian    Penal   Code,    1860---Section	395--Highway
robbery--Case  of--Accused convicted--Trial  Court  judgment
well   reasoned	 and  considered--Based	 on   testimony	  of
victims--High  Court in appeal--Rejecting trial court  judg-
ment  without  proper consideration  and  discussion-Accused
acquitted--Supreme Court in appeal by State---Setting  aside
High  Court Judgment--Restoring conviction and	sentence  on
accused-Necessity for seriousness and care to be bestowed in
such cases-Pointed out.



HEADNOTE:
    The	 respondent. along with three others, was tried	 for
offences under sections 395,397 and 412 of the Indian  Penal
Code. The prosecution alleged that the respondent had delib-
erately	 dashed	 his car against the car of P.W.  5  on	 the
Delhi-Jaipur Road, while the latter was traveling to  Jaipur
alongwith his wife, PW 6 and daughter. Five persons, two  or
three  of them armed with revolvers and others with  daggers
came out of the respondent's car. One of them gave a  couple
of  knife blows in the chest of PW 5, and another.  who	 was
armed with a pistol, fired shots in the air and scared	away
drivers of some trucks who were passing along that road	 and
tried  to  come to the aid,of PW 5 who was  crying  out	 for
help. One of the assailants removed the ear rings,  necklace
and  wrist watch from the person of PW 6. and in that  proc-
ess, one of her ear lobes was cut as under. The wrist  watch
and  purse  of PW 5 and three attache cases on	the  luggage
carrier	 of  his car were also forcibly	 removed  and  taken
away.  Before the culprits left the spot in their  car	with
all the booty. a shot was fired by one of them which hit  PW
5  on the forehead. PW 5 somehow managed to drive  back	 his
car to Gurgaon and narrated the whole incident to his  part-
ner  and thereafter he and his wife were medically  examined
and  treated  at  Gurgaon Civil Hospital,  for	the  various
injuries  that were found on them. Thereafter an F.I.R.	 was
lodged	with the Gurgaon Police. The accused  were  arrested
after  a fairly long delay and two test	 identification	 pa-
rades  were held. one separately for the  respondent-accused
at  his	 request and other for the remaining  suspects.	 The
respondent  was identified by the victims. On the  basis  of
the  information furnished by the accused some of the  arti-
cles of the victims were recovered.
1065
    The	 trial	court held that the charge against  the	 re-
spondent  under	 section 395 I.P.C. was	 proved	 beyond	 all
reasonable doubt and convicted and sentenced him to  undergo
rigorous  imprisonment for four years. The other  three	 ac-
cused were acquitted on the ground that their  participation
in the crime was not sufficiently proved and hence they were
entitled to the benefit of doubt.
    The	 High  Court,  however, allowed the  appeal  of	 the
respondent by extending the benefit of doubt to him and	 set
aside his conviction and sentence.
Allowing the State's appeal by Special leave.
    HELD: 1. A case of highway robbery, such as this, should
have been dealt with much more seriousness and care than has
been  bestowed on it by the High Court. Its approach to	 the
case  and the conclusion recorded by it cannot but  be	cha-
racterised  as	manifestly illegal and perverse.  The  trial
court  has rightly concluded that from the evidence  of	 the
victims	 the participation of the respondent in the  commis-
sion  of  the  offence had been	 proved	 beyond	 all  doubt.
[1069B-C]
    2.1 The High Court, by a most perfunctory judgment,	 set
aside the judgment of the trial court, insofar as the  trial
court  had  convicted the respondent herein,  and  acquitted
him.  It has dealt with the case in a very  superficial	 and
casual	manner	and has not even taken care to	discuss	 the
evidence adduced in the case, before it proceeded to  inter-
fere  with the well considered judgment of the trial  court.
[1068G-H]
    2.2.  The trial court after an elaborate and  analytical
discussion  of	the whole evidence recorded  the  conclusion
that  the participation of the respondent in the  commission
of the crime was established beyond all doubt inasmuch as he
had  been  identified  by the both the	victims,  and  their
testimony  narrating the details of the incident of  robbery
and assault was not shaken in cross-examination and deserved
to be accepted as wholly truthful, [1068D-E]
    2.3 Both the victims, PW 5 and 6, had clearly identified
the respondent at the test identification parade as well  as
in the court and they had clearly and unequivocally disposed
that  he  was  one of the assailants who took  part  in	 the
robbery	 and  assault. The trial court has given  sound	 and
convincing  reasons  for  accepting and	 acting	 upon  their
testimony. The High Court has, however. not discussed in its
judgment  as to why it considered that the testimony of	 the
victims of the crime could not_be accepted and why it  could
not  form the foundation for the conviction of the  respond-
ent. [1068H; 1069A-B]
1066
    3. The judgment of the High Court is set aside and	that
of  the trial court convicting the respondent under  section
395  of the Indian Penal Code and sentencing him to  undergo
rigorous  imprisonment of four years is restored.  Necessity
for  awarding  severe  punishment in such  cases  of  proven
highway robbery stressed. [1069F]



JUDGMENT:
    CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 559
of 1983.
    From the Judgment and Order dated 7.1.1982 of the Punjab
and Haryana High Court in Crl. Appeal No. 537 (SB) of 1980.
Harbans Lal, I.S. Goel and K. Chaudhri for the Appellant.
Govind Mukhoty (Amicus Curiae) for the Respondent.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
    BALAKRISHNA	 ERADI, J. Uttam alias Cheaku, the  respond-
ent-herein along with three others was tried by the  learned
Additional Sessions Judge, Gurgaon for alleged commission of
offences under Sections 395,397 and 4 12 of the Indian Penal
Code. By judgment dated July 21. 1980, the learned Addition-
al  Sessions Judge held that the charge against Uttam  under
Section	 395 I.P.C. was proved beyond all  reasonable  doubt
and  he was accordingly convicted and sentenced	 to  undergo
rigorous  imprisonment for four years. The other  three	 ac-
cused were acquitted on the ground that their  participation
in the crime was not sufficiently proved and hence they were
entitled to the benefit of doubt. The respondent carried the
matter	in appeal to the High Court of Punjab  and  Haryana.
The  High  Court by its impugned judgment dated	 January  7,
1982 allowed the said appeal, extending the benefit of doubt
to  the	 respondent, and set aside his conviction  and	sen-
tence.	The State of Haryana has come up to this Court	with
this  appeal against the said order of acquittal  after	 ob-
taining Special leave from this Court.
    Briefly stated, the prosecution case i.s that on October
24,  1978, Om Parkash (P.W. 5) accompanied by his  wife	 Jai
Rani  (P.W. 6) and their daughter Neelam left Delhi  in	 the
early hours of the morning for Jaipur by car. Om Parkash and
his  wife  Jai Rani were in the front seat  of	the  vehicle
while their daughter was occupying the rear seat. When their
car  had  reached  about 10-12 Kms. beyond  Gurgaon  on	 the
Delhi-Jaipur  Road,  another car  bearing  registration	 No.
DEA-2914 came
1067
from  behind and attempted to overtake their  vehicle.	Even
though	Om Parkash had made way for the other car  to  pass,
that  car deliberately swerved to the left side	 and  struck
against	 the  front wheel of his car, whereupon	 Om  Parkash
stopped	 his car on the left side of the road in  the  kacha
portion.  In the meantime, the other car also stopped  at  a
distance of about ten paces ahead and five persons came	 out
of that vehicle. It is stated that two or three out of	them
were  armed with revolvers and others with daggers. Om	Par-
kash  got out of the vehicle and asked the assailants as  to
why they had caused the accident. In the meantime, Jai	Rani
also came out of the car. One of the assailants then gave  a
couple of knife blows in the chest of Om Parkash,  whereupon
he tried to raise an alarm. Hearing the said cry' for  help,
some trucks which were passing along that road tried to stop
but one of the assailants who was armed with a pistol, fired
shots in the air and scared away those truck drivers. There-
after one of the assailants removed the ear rings,  necklace
and  wrist  watch from the person of Jai Rani  and  in	that
process	 one  of her ear lobes was cut as under.  The  wrist
watch  and purse of Om Parkash were also removed by  one  of
the  culprits.	Apart from that, three attache	cases  which
were  on the luggage carrier of the car were  also  forcibly
removed	 and taken away by the miscreants. Before  the	cul-
prits left the spot in their car with all the booty, a	shot
was  fired by one of them which hit Om Parkash on his  fore-
head. After inflicting the said injury, the miscreants	made
good their escape.
    Om	Parkash	 somehow managed to drive back	his  car  to
Gurgaon	 and there he contacted his partner  Joginder  Singh
(P.W. 7) to whom he narrated the whole incident. Om  Parkash
was  immediately taken to Civil Hospital, Gurgaon  where  he
was  medically examined and various injuries were  found  on
his person. Jai Rani also medically examined and the  injury
on her right ear lobe was declared to be grievous. The other
injuries  were	found to be simple for which she  was  given
first  aid.  The  first information  report  was  thereafter
lodged with the police by Om Parkash and Sub-Inspector Tilak
Raj  (P.W. 21) carried out the investigation.  He  recovered
empty  cartridge cases (Exhibits P. 15 and P. 16),  one	 wad
(Exhibit P. 17) and one Ball Point Pen (Exhibit P. 18)	from
the  place  of occurrence. During the investigation  it	 was
found  that the car used by the culprits had been stolen  on
October	 23,  1973  from the house of its  owner,  one	S.K.
Mahajan.  Subsequently,	 on October 27, 1978,  the  car	 was
found  lying abandoned in the Ghaziabad factory area and  it
was taken into police custody.
    The	 accused  were arrested after a	 fairly	 long  delay
since  it so happened that subsequent to the  occurrence  in
question the accused
1068
persons	 had  been allegedly involved in the  commission  of
other  crimes  in the State of Uttar Pradesh and  they	were
lodged	in the Meerut jail. After the accused  were  brought
from Meerut, two test identification parades were held,	 one
separately  for Uttam at his request and the other  for	 the
remaining suspects. In the first parade, Uttam was correctly
identified  by both Om Parkash and Jai Rani. In	 the  second
identification parade, Om Parkash failed to identify any  of
the other accused whereas Jai Rani identified Trilok  Singh,
who  was  accused  No. 2. On the basis	of  the	 information
furnished  by the accused the Investigating Officer and	 the
police party led by him recovered some of the articles which
formed	the contents of the suit-cases removed from the	 car
of  the victims. They consisted of new suit  length  cloths,
sarees, trousers, blouses, petti coats etc.
    The	 Prosecution  examined in all 22  witnesses  in	 its
endeavour to establish the guilt of the accused in  relation
to  the the charges framed against them. The  learned  Addi-
tional	Sessions  Judge after an  elaborate  and  analytical
discussion  of	the whole evidence recorded  the  conclusion
that  the participation of the respondent-Uttam in the	com-
mission of the crime was established beyond all doubt  inas-
much  as he had been identified by both Om Parkash (P.W.  5)
and Jai Rani (P.W. 6), and the testimony given by these	 two
witnesses  narrating the details of the incident of  robbery
and  assault was not in any manner shaken in  cross-examina-
tion  and  deserved to be accepted as wholly  truthful.	 The
remaining  three  accused were given the  benefit  of  doubt
mainly	on the ground that excepting the second accused	 who
had  been identified only by Jai Rani at the  identification
parade, the others were not identified either by Jai Rani or
by  Om Parkash and hence there was no satisfactory proof  of
their participation in the crime. In the light of the afore-
said  conclusion  reached  by him,  the	 learned  Additional
Sessions Judge convicted the respondent-Uttam under  Section
395  I.P.C. and sentenced him to undergo rigorous  imprison-
ment of four years.
    The High Court by a judgment which we are constrained to
characterise as most perfunctory has set aside the  judgment
of the learned Additional Sessions Judge in so far as he was
convicted the respondent-herein and acquitted him. We regret
to  have  to remark that the High Court has dealt  with	 the
case  in  a very superficial and casual manner and  has	 not
even taken to,trouble to discuss the evidence adduced in the
case before it proceeded to interfere with the well  consid-
ered  judgment of the trial court. Both Om Parkash (P.W.  5)
and Jai Rani (P.W. 6) had clearly identified the  respondent
at  the test identification parade as well as in  the  Court
and they had
1069
clearly	 and  unequivocally deposed that he was one  of	 the
assailants  who took part in the robbery and assault.  Their
testimony has been discussed at length by the learned  Addi-
tional Sessions Judge and he has given sound and  convincing
reasons	 for accepting and acting upon the same.  The  whole
discussion of the case by the High Court is contained in one
short  paragraph of its judgment namely, paragraph 6. It  is
not  disclosed	anywhere therein as to why  the	 High  Court
considered  that  the testimony of these two  witnesses	 who
were the victims of the crime could not be accepted and	 why
it  could not form the foundation for the conviction of	 the
respondent. A case of highway robbery, such as this,  should
have been dealt with much more seriousness and care than has
been  bestowed on it by the High Court. The approach of	 the
High  Court  to the case and the conclusion recorded  by  it
cannot	but be characterised as manifestly illegal and	per-
verse.
    In the absence of any discussion of the evidence by	 the
High  Court, we have ourselves gone through the entire	evi-
dence adduced in the case with the assistance of the Counsel
appearing  in both sides. We are in complete agreement	with
the  conclusion recorded by the learned Additional  Sessions
Judge that from the evidence of Om Parkash (P.W. 5) and	 Jai
Rani  (P.W.  6),  the participation of the  accused  in	 the
commission of the offence has been proved beyond all reason-
able doubt. The respondent was, therefore, rightly convicted
by  the learned Additional Sessions Judge and the only	mis-
take committed by the learned Additional Sessions Judge	 was
in not in awarding a more severe sentence commensurate	with
the gravity of the offence.
    In the result, we allow the appeal, set aside the  judg-
ment  Of  the  High Court and restore that  of	the  learned
Additional  Sessions Judge convicting the  respondent  under
Section	 395 I.P.C. and sentencing him to  undergo  rigorous
imprisonment of four years. The Bail Bond of the  respondent
will stand cancelled. He shall be taken into custody  forth-
with to serve out the remaining portion of the sentence.
N.P.V.						      Appeal
allowed.
1070




