

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
United Bank Of India vs Smt. Kanan Bala Devi & Ors on 21 April, 1987Equivalent citations: 1987 AIR 1510, 1987 SCR  (2)1090
Author: V Khalid
Bench: Khalid, V. (J)
           PETITIONER:
UNITED BANK OF INDIA

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
SMT. KANAN BALA DEVI & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT21/04/1987

BENCH:
KHALID, V. (J)
BENCH:
KHALID, V. (J)
OZA, G.L. (J)

CITATION:
 1987 AIR 1510		  1987 SCR  (2)1090
 1987 SCC  (2) 583	  JT 1987 (2)	227
 1987 SCALE  (1)858


ACT:
    Code  of Civil Procedure, 1908: Order XXII, Rules 4	 and
10-A-Abatement--Death  of  defendant--Notice  given  to	 one
branch	of plaintiff bank--Delay in making applications	 for
impleading  legal representatives and setting  aside  abate-
ment--Whether notice to one branch of a bank notice to other
branches.



HEADNOTE:
    The defendant had an overdraft account with a particular
branch of the plaintiff bank in the city. A suit was  insti-
tuted  against	him by that branch in 1952 for	recovery  of
certain	 sums with interest. He died on 6th  November  1960.
The  widow informed another branch of the bank of the  death
of her husband on 20th December, 1960.
    The	 applications for impleading the  legal	 representa-
tives of the defendant and for setting aside abatement	were
made  in 1968, about 8 years after the death of the  defend-
ant. The delay in making these applications was sought to be
explained  with	 the plea that the concerned branch  of	 the
bank had no knowledge of the death of the defendant till  it
was informed by the other branch.
    The	 High Court rejected the applications on the  ground
that no sufficient cause was shown for setting aside  abate-
ment. It held that an intimation of the death of the defend-
ant to the bank in the other branch could not be treated  as
no  intimation to the branch which was the plaintiff in	 the
suit.
Allowing the appeal by special leave, the Court,
    HELD:  The	High  Court was in error  in  rejecting	 the
application  to	 set aside abatement and to  condone  delay.
[1095C]
    All	 branches of a bank could not be imputed  with	con-
structive  knowledge of the death of a customer	 simply	 be-
cause  one  of	the branches had been informed	of  it,	 for
notice	to  one branch of a bank is no notice to  the  other
branches. [1092H; 1094H]
1091
    In the instant case, it is not stated or proved that the
branch	which  had filed the suit  had	information  earlier
about  the  death of the defendant. It is evident  from	 the
record	that  even  on 3rd June, 1968 the  counsel  for	 the
defendant did not know about the death of the defendant. The
fact  that  a particular branch of the	plaintiff  bank	 had
knowledge  of  the death was not sufficient  to	 impute	 the
concerned branch with constructive notice. [1093A; 1094A, H;
1095A]
(1918) The Times Law Reports, Vol. XXXV, p. 142 referred to.
    The provisions of 0. 22, R. 10-A of the Civil  Procedure
Code  requiring a pleader appearing for a party to the	suit
to  inform the court when he comes to know of the  death  of
that  party, whereupon the court is enjoined to give  notice
of  such death to the other party, casts a duty only on	 the
pleader and is not absolutely mandatory. [1095B]



JUDGMENT:
    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 1747	 (N)
of 1973.
    From  the  Judgment	 and Order dated  16.6.1972  of	 the
Calcutta High Court in Appeal No. 54 of 1969.
    C.S.  Vaidayanathan, Pravir Choudhary, K.V. Mohan,	H.K.
Dutt and S.R. Bhat for the Appellant.
G.S. Chatterjee for the Respondent.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
    KHALID,  J. This is an appeal by special leave filed  by
the plaintiff bank against the judgment of the Calcutta High
Court, arising from suit no. 547 of 1952, filed for recovery
of  a sum of Rs.17,091-0-1 with interest. The  question	 in-
volved in this appeal is a short one, but of general  impor-
tance to banks in the country. we have made it clear to	 the
appellant  bank that we are interested only in	laying	down
the  law  in this appeal and not in giving a decree  to	 the
bank  for this small amount, the claim for which  originated
nearly	35 years ago. The learned counsel for the  appellant
bank has agreed to this suggestion.
    The	 defendant  in the suit was one Ramesh	Chandra	 Roy
Choudhury.  The plaintiff was the United Bank of India	Ltd.
The  defendant had an over-draft account with the  bank.  He
died  on the 6th November, 1960. On the 20th Dec., 1960	 the
widow of the defendant,
1092
Smt.  Kananbala Devi informed the Deshapriya Park Branch  of
the bank of the death of the defendant. The bank had several
branches  in  Calcutta. One of the branches  was  the  Royal
Exchange Branch. It was this branch that instituted the suit
in question.
    The	 applications for impleading the  legal	 representa-
tives of the defendant and for setting aside abatement	were
made  by a Chambers Summons on the 8th August, 1968 about  8
years after the death of the defendant. The delay in  making
these  applications was attempted to be explained  with	 the
plea  that  the	 Royal Exchange Branch of the  bank  had  no
knowledge of the death of the defendant till the  Deshapriya
Park  Branch was informed of the death. The High  Court	 re-
jected	the applications holding that "In our opinion it  is
no explanation to say that the Royal Exchange Branch of	 the
plaintiff  bank which had really instituted the	 suit  could
not  and/or  did not have knowledge of the death  of  Ramesh
Chandra Roy Choudhury. An intimation of the death of  Ramesh
Chandra	 Roy  Choudhury to the bank in the  Deshapriya	Park
Branch	could  not be treated as no intimation to  the	bank
which happens to be the plaintiff in this suit. In our	view
no  sufficient cause was shown in the petition	for  setting
aside  the  abatement  and the learned Judge  was  right  in
dismissing  the	 said application.  The	 appeal,  therefore,
fails and is dismissed" Hence this appeal.
    The	 learned counsel for the appellant submits  that  it
would be extremely dangerous for courts to impute  knowledge
of the death of a customer with all the branches of a  bank,
solely on the strength of information given to a  particular
branch of the bank. It is submitted that in these days	when
banking	 business  has	expanded by leaps  and	bounds	with
branches  spread over large areas, it would not be  possible
for  a	particular branch to know the death of	one  of	 its
customers if that branch had not been informed of the death.
In  the absence of highly technical modern methods  or	com-
puterised information to all the branches, of their  custom-
ers  and their details, no branch of a bank can be  presumed
to know whether a particular customer is alive or not unless
that hank is given necessary information.
    The	 submission  that all branches of a bank  should  be
imputed	 with constructive knowledge of the death of a	cus-
tomer  simply because one of the branches had been  informed
of it would result in adverse consequences and would  defeat
actions by banks for recovery of dues
1093
and  would  work great loss to banks and would	harm  public
interest. In this case, it is not stated or proved that	 the
Royal  Exchange	 Branch had information	 earlier  about	 the
death  of the defendant. To prove this we have	two  letters
produced by the appellant: (1) dated 3rd June, 1968 and	 the
other  dated 17th June, 1968. The two letters read  as	fol-
lows:
			   10 OLD POST OFFICE ST.,
				  CALCUTTA.
		   M/s. S.N. Sen & Co.
		   Dear	 Sir,				 3rd
	      June, 1968.
	      United Bank of India Ltd.
		       v.
	      Ramesh Chandra Roy Choudhury.
	      As  I have not yet been able to  make  contact
	      with  my client until now in spite of  my	 at-
	      tempts  on that behalf, please do not  mention
	      the  suit tomorrow but mention the  suit	some
	      time next week. The suit was part-heard  about
	      9	 or  10 years before and my client  has	 not
	      seen  since then. I hope you will mention	 the
	      suit next week on previous notice to me.
					    Yours  faithful-
	      ly, sd/-K.P. Mustaphy.
		    M/s. S.N. Sen & Co.
		    Dear Sir,				17th
	      June 1968.
			       Suit No. 547 of 1952
			    United Bank of India Ltd.
	      V.
	      Ramesh Chandra Roy Choudhury
	      Kindly  note that when the above suit will  be
	      mentioned	 by  you  before  his  Lordship	 the
	      Hon'ble  Mr. Justice R.M. Dutt, I will  submit
	      his  Lordship  that as the defendant  died  in
	      1960,  the suit has abated and cannot be	pro-
	      ceeded with.
					    Yours  faithful-
	      ly, Sd/-K.P. Mustaphy.
Both the letters are written by the counsel for the  defend-
ant to
1094
the  bank. It is evident from the first letter that even  on
3rd  June, 1968, the counsel for the defendant did not	know
about  the  death of the defendant. It was  only  thereafter
that he came to know of the same.
    This branch of law appears to be barren of authority.  A
question  akin	to this is reported in 1918, The  Times	 Law
Reports,  Volume  XXXV,	 page 142. The brief  facts  are  as
follows:
	      The  plaintiffs'	claim in the suit was  on  a
	      cheque for a 100, dated February 5, 1918 drawn
	      by  the  ,defendant and made  payable  to	 the
	      order of a Mrs. N. Try, who endorsed it to the
	      plaintiffs.  The defendant obtained  leave  to
	      defend.  The  bank  had  branch  at  Victoria-
	      street, Westminster. of which the manager	 was
	      Mr.  Stephen Trott. Among their customers	 was
	      Mrs.  Try.  The  bank  had  a  branch  at	 the
	      Oxford-street branch of the Bank and she asked
	      the  manager to cash it. The amount was  paid.
	      The manager had no notice that the cheque	 had
	      been stopped. The cheque when presented by the
	      Victoria-street  Branch to  the  Oxford-street
	      Branch  was  returned marked "Ordered  not  to
	      pay". The cheque was stopped by a letter	from
	      the  defendant  to the  Oxford-street  Branch.
	      That letter was undated.
    It	was  under these circumstances that the	 action	 was
brought. The question was when the drawer of a cheque  stops
payment by a notice given only to that branch on which it is
drawn and the payee afterwards endorses the cheque to anoth-
er  branch  of the same bank and the manager of	 that  other
branch advances money on the cheque in good faith and  with-
out  notice  that the cheque had been stopped,	whether	 the
bank is entitled to recover against the drawer in an  action
on the cheque. Here it was clear that the cheque was stopped
on  the Oxford- street Branch and that there was  no  notice
yet  at the Victoria street Branch when the cheque was	pre-
sented.	 it  was held that the bank was the  holder  of	 the
cheque	and  the fact that the branch at  Oxford-street	 had
notice	not to pay the cheque did not affect the  bank	and,
therefore, the bank was entitled to relief. It was  observed
that there was a right to a separate notice of dishonour  as
between the different branches of a bank.
    Though this judgment is not .on all fours with our case,
we  seek  some assistance from it for our purpose  and	that
limited purpose is that notice to one branch of a bank is no
notice	to the other branches. That being so the  fact	that
the Deshapriya Park Branch had knowledge of
1095
the  death, will not be sufficient to impute Royal  Exchange
Branch with constructive notice and reject the	applications
to set aside abatement and to condone delay.
    Of	course,	 the law under the present  Civil  Procedure
Code obviates this difficulty to some extent under Order  22
Rule  10-A, Under the rule, when a pleader appearing  for  a
party to the suit comes to know of the death of that  party,
he  shall  inform the Court about it,  whereupon  the  Court
shall give notice of such death of the other party. However,
this  provision	 not being absolutely mandatory and  cast  a
duty only on the pleader, we thought it necessary to  answer
the question of law involved in this appeal.
    For	 the foregoing reasons we hold that the	 High  Court
was  in an error in rejecting the application to  set  aside
abatement  and to condone delay on the plea that  notice  to
one branch will be notice to other branches.
    We	set aside the judgment of the High Court  and  allow
this  appeal with no order as to costs, As indicated  above,
the matter will rest here and the bank will not be permitted
to  proceed against the defendant or his  legal	 representa-
tives to realize the amount involved in the suit. The amount
will  be deemed to have been fully discharged. We have	only
decided the question of law for the benefit of the banks and
general public.
P.S.S.						      Appeal
allowed.
1096




