

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Rashpal Malhotra vs Mrs. Satya Rajput And Another on 11 September, 1987Equivalent citations: 1987 AIR 2235, 1988 SCR  (1) 110
Author: S Mukharji
Bench: Mukharji, Sabyasachi (J)
           PETITIONER:
RASHPAL MALHOTRA

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
MRS. SATYA RAJPUT AND ANOTHER

DATE OF JUDGMENT11/09/1987

BENCH:
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)
BENCH:
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)
OZA, G.L. (J)

CITATION:
 1987 AIR 2235		  1988 SCR  (1) 110
 1987 SCC  (4) 391	  JT 1987 (3)	546
 1987 SCALE  (2)516


ACT:
     Constitution of India, Article 136: Court acts not only
     as 'Court of law' but also as 'Court of equity'.
          East Punjab  Urban Rent Restriction Act, 1949: ss. 2(i)
     & 13-C	Eviction-`Tenant'' an  entity not a juristic person-
     Eviction Suit-Whether maintainable.
   
HELD:

     The landlady, respondent No. 1, leased out the premises
in question in Chandigarh to respondent No. 2, for residence
of its	General Manager,  the appellant.  The lease deed was
signed on  behalf of  the  lessee  'for	 Haryana  Milk	Food
Corporation' by	 R.P.  Malhotra,  the  appellant.  When	 the
landlady came  to know in the end of 1974 that the appellant
had left  the services	of the respondent No. 2, she stopped
accepting rent	from him.  She filed an application under s.
13 of  the East	 Punjab Urban Rent Restriction Act, 1949 for
eviction against  him and  respondent No. 2 in November 1977
on the grounds: (a) non-payment of rent from January 1, 1975
onwards, (b) the subletting of entire premises by respondent
No.  2	 to  the  appellant,  and  (c)	bona  fide  personal
requirement. That application was contested by the appellant
and respondent	No. 2 who filed written statement contending
that respondent	 No. 2 was just a trade name and not a legal
entity, nor  it was a partnership firm for, the owner of the
said concern  was Kailash  Chemical and	 Textile Mills Ltd.,
that there  could not  have been  any lease with such a non-
legal entity,  and that	 a suit	 against such a body was not
maintainable.
     Both the  trial court  and the  appellant court ordered
ejectment of the appellant and respondent No. 2 holding that
respondent No. 2 was the tenant under respondent No. 1, that
the appellant had taken the premises on behalf of respondent
No. 2,	that they  were in  arrears of	rent, and  that	 the
premises were bona fide required by respondent No. 1.
     The  High	Court  dismissed  the  appellant's  revision
petition.
111
     Dismissing the appeal by special leave,
^
     HELD:1. It	 is apparent from the facts that the tenancy
agreement was  not with	 the appellant,	 and the  lease	 was
signed by  him on  behalf of  the other	 entity	 though	 not
strictly legal	but it	was entered  into by a legal entity,
namely, the  Kailash Chemical  and Textile  Mills  Ltd.	 The
parties knew  that the	appellant  was	not  a	tenant.	 The
parties were  aware that  the company  was the real owner of
respondent No.	2. The	company had  accepted that position.
Neither	 respondent   No.  2  nor  its	owner  company	was,
therefore, prejudiced by holding that the lessee was not the
appellant and  they have  not been  prejudiced by  not being
made formal  parties. The order of eviction, therefore, does
not call for any interference. [116B-C]
     Modi  Vanaspati   Manufacturing  Company  and  Anr.  v.
Katihar Jute  Mills (Pvt.) Ltd., A.I.R. 1969 Calcutta 496 at
page 511; Rajendra Prasad oil Mills, Kanpur and Anr. v. Smt.
Chunni Devi  and Ors.,	A.I.R. 1969  Allahabad page  1; M/s.
M.K.M. Moosa  Bhai Amin,  Kota v.  Rajasthan Textile  Mills,
Bhawanimandi  A.I.R.  1974  Rajasthan  194  and	 Educational
Supplies  Depot,  Trivandrum  v.  Vithoba  High	 School	 and
others, 1970 Kerala Law Journal reports 43. referred to.
     2. The Supreme Court is more than a court of appeal. It
exercises power under Article 136 only when there is supreme
need. Therefore, even if legal flaws might be electronically
detected, the Court cannot interfere save manifest injustice
or substantial question of public importance. [116F]
     In the instant case, it has been held by the High Court
and the	 courts below  that no	deposit	 had  been  made  in
accordance with law. Merely because in the form of the lease
the owner was not mentioned and as such was not made a party
to the	suit and  the lease was purported to be entered into
with an	 entity which  was not	a juristic person and a suit
was filed  against  such  non-juristic	person,	 this  Court
should not  interfere with the conclusions arrived at by the
appellate authority and the High Court. [116G-H; 117A]
     Heavy Engineering	Corporation Ltd.  Ranchi v. K. Singh
and Company,  Ranchi, A.l.R.  1977 Supreme  Court  2031	 and
Baigana and  others v. Deputy Collector of Consolidation and
Ors., [1978] 3 S.C.R. 509, referred to.
     3. The  Supreme Court  in exercising  its	power  under
Article 136
112
acts not  only as Court of law but also as a court of equity
and must  subserve ultimately  the cause  of justice. In the
instant case,  there was  evidence that	 there was some bona
fide need of the landlady for her family. After a long lapse
of time,  in the  facts and  the circumstances	of the case,
therefore, interference	 with the findings arrived at by the
High Court  and the  courts below  would not  be  justified.
[117A-B]
     [The Court	 directed that in case the landlady lets out
the premises  within the  period of  five  years  the  first
option should  be given to the appellant, that she would not
sell the  premises within a period of five years and in case
she does  the first  option should be given to the appellant
to purchase  the property, that the decree for eviction will
not  be	  executed  upto  31st	August,	 1988  provided	 the
appellant files an undertaking in the usual form.] [117C-D]
   

JUDGMENT:

     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Civil  Appeal No. 188 of
1981.
     From the  Judgment and  order dated  5.12.1980  of	 the
Punjab and Haryana High Court in Civil Revision Petition No.
136 of 1980.
     R.K. Garg for the Appellant.
     Rajinder Sachhar and Mukul Mudgal for the Respondents.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     SABYASACHI MUKHARJI,  J.  This  is	 an  appeal  by	 the
appellant claiming  to	be  a  tenant  of  the	premises  in
question. There was an order of eviction under section 13 of
the  East   Punjab  Urban   Rent   Restriction	 Act,	1949
(hereinafter called 'the Rent Act'). The respondent-landlady
is the	owner of  House	 No.  722,  Sector  IIB,  Chandigarh
(hereinafter called  'the suit premises'). The suit premises
was let	 out  by  a  lease  deed  by  respondent  No.  1  to
respondent No.	2 herein,  Haryana Milk Food Corporation for
the residence  of its  General Manager	at Chandigarh. It is
stated in the said lease deed that the lease was for the use
of Shri	 R.P. Malhotra	who was	 at that  time	the  General
Manager of  Haryana Milk  Food Corporation. On behalf of the
lessor the  landlady, respondent  herein has  signed and  on
behalf of  the lessee, it is signed as follows: "for Haryana
Milk Food  Corporation R.P.  Malhotra" who  is the appellant
herein. The appellant left the services of Haryana Milk Food
Corporation in	the end	 of 1974 and thereafter attempted to
pay the	 rent of  the suit premises by sending it by a bank-
draft with  a covering	letter on the letter-head of Haryana
Milk Food  Corporation. It  is the  case  of  the  landlady,
respondent
113
No. 1  that on	coming to  know	 of  the  cessation  of	 the
appellant's employment	with Haryana  Milk Food	 Corporation
the  respondent	 No.  1	 stopped  accepting  rent  from	 the
appellant.  On	 23rd  of  November,  1977  application	 for
eviction was  filed by	the respondent	No.  1	against	 the
appellant  and	 respondent  No.   2   Haryana	 Milk	Food
Corporation, inter  alia, on the following grounds: (a) non-
payment of  rent from  1.1.75  onwards;	 (b)  subletting  of
entire premises	 by the Haryana Milk Food Corporation to the
appellant and (c) bona fide personal requirement.
     It is relevant to mention that the rent application was
filed by the respondent making Haryana Milk Food Corporation
as the	first defendant	 and the  appellant  as	 the  second
defendant under section 13 of the Rent Act. Respondent No. 2
Haryana Milk  Food Corporation	filed  a  written  statement
contending that	 Haryana Milk  Food Corporation	 was just  a
trade name  and not a legal entity, nor it was a partnership
firm and  the owner of the said concern was Kailash Chemical
and Textile  Mills Ltd.	 The same  ground was  taken by	 the
appellant in  the written  statement filed by the appellant.
Respondent No.	2 further  contended that  the appellant had
been sending  cheques and  drafts for the payment of rent to
the landlady  which she	 had never  accepted as	 none of the
drafts sent  by the  appellant to the landlady had ever been
encashed. Respondent  No. 2  further contended	that she had
never accepted the appellant as the tenant from whom she had
never  accepted	 any  rent..  The  landlady  also  filed  an
application for	 impleading  the  company  as  a  party	 but
unfortunately  for  unexplained	 reason	 the  same  was	 not
proceeded with and withdrawn.
     The Trial Court raising issues, inter alia, held so far
as relevant  to the  present purpose  that Haryana Milk Food
Corporation obtained  the house	 for the  appellant and	 the
said concern was making payment of rent to respondent No. 1.
The appellant and respondent No. 2 were liable to be ejected
on the	ground of  arrears of rent. It was further held that
the suit  premises was	required bona fide by respondent No.
1. In  the premises  on 5th  of May,  1979 the	Trial  Court
ordered the  ejectment of the appellant and respondent No. 2
from the  suit premises. The judgment of the Appellate Court
was passed  on 5th  of November, 1979 affirming the findings
of the	Trial Court  holding that  the	appellant  took	 the
premises on  behalf of Haryana Milk Food Corporation. It was
further held  that Haryana  Milk Food  Corporation  was	 the
tenant under  respondent No. 1. It was further held that the
appellant and  respondent No.  2  were	held  liable  to  be
ejected on  account of nonpayment of rent and in view of the
aforesaid findings eviction was
114
     ordered from  the suit  premises. There  was a  further
revision to  the High court and the High Court dismissed the
appellant's revision petition affirming the reasoning of the
Courts below.
     The main  point of	 challenge in  this Court  was	that
Haryana Milk  Food Corporation	was not a legal entity and a
suit against  such a  body  was	 not  maintainable.  It	 was
further contended  that there  could not have been any lease
with a	non-legal entity.  The main ground of attack in this
appeal was  that the real tenancy was with the appellant and
not respondent No. 1. It may be mentioned that an appeal was
filed before  the Appellate  Authority by  Haryana Milk Food
Corporation  through   its  General   Manager,	and  Kailash
Chemical and  Textile Mills  Ltd., through  its Director. It
was contended  in the  grounds	of  said  appeal,  that	 the
relationship of	 the landlord  and tenant between respondent
No. 1  and the	appellant did  not  stand  proved  from	 the
material on  record. It	 was further contended that the note
signed by  the appellant  that the order dated 5th May, 1979
had virtually  held Kailash Chemical and Textile Mills Ltd.,
as liable.  It had  treated Haryana Milk Food Corporation as
synonymous with Kailash Chemical and Textile Mills Ltd., and
it was,	 therefore, aggrieved by the said order. That appeal
had been  filed by Haryana Milk Food Corporation through its
General Manager and Kailash Chemical and Textile Mills Ltd.,
through	 its   Director.  Therefore,  Kailash  Chemical	 and
Textile Mills Ltd., accepted that this was the company which
owned Haryana  Milk Food  Corporation and  it  was  a  legal
entity.
     In support	 of this  contention that a non-legal entity
like the  Haryana Milk Food Corporation could not enter into
a reference  with the  landlady, reliance  was placed on the
statement of  Halsbury's Laws  of England,  Fourth  Edition,
volume 7  at page 457, paragraphs 765, 766 and 767, where it
was stated  that as  regards litigation	 by an	incorporated
company, as  a rule  the directors were the persons who have
the authority  to act  for the	company. Relying on the said
statement of law the Calcutta High Court in the case of Modi
Vanaspati Manufacturing	 Company and another v. Katihar lute
Mills (Pvt.)  Limited, A.I.R.  1969 Calcutta 496 at page 511
in paragraph  42, A.N.	Ray, as the learned Chief Justice of
India then  was, observed  that the  provisions contained in
order 30,  Rule 10 of the Code were that any person carrying
on business  in the  name and  style other than his own name
may be	sued in such name or style as if it were a firm name
and so	far as the nature of the case would permit all rules
under order  30 of  the Code  of Civil	Procedure  would  be
applicable. Agreeing  with the	said observations, the other
learned Judge, S.K. Mukherjee, J. at para-
115
     graph 63  referred to  the Halsbury's  Laws of England,
Third Edition,Volume 6 at page 444, where it was said that a
company can  only sue  or be sued in its corporate name. Mr.
Garg, learned  counsel for the appellant strongly relying on
these observations  submitted that  the suit against Haryana
Milk Food  Corporation was not maintainable. A contrary view
was taken  by the  Full Bench of the Allahabad High Court in
Rajendra Prasad oil Mills, Kanpur and another v. Smt. Chunni
Devi and  others, A.I.R. 1969 Allahabad page 1, where it was
held that  a limited company falls within the meaning of the
expression 'person' as used in Rule 10, order 30 of the Code
of Civil Procedure. This would be so even though the limited
company might  have been  carrying on  business in a name or
style other  than its own without any attempt to conceal its
own corporate  name and	 this fact  was known  to the  party
suing. There, the Court observed that there could not be any
controversy that  Rajendra Prasad  oil Mills,  Kanpur was an
undertaking owned by N.K. Industries limited. Satish Chandra
J. as  the learned  Chief Justice then was, observed that in
certain circumstances a limited company carrying on business
in an  assumed name by concealment of its own corporate name
is a  person within  meaning of order 30 Rule 10 of the Code
of Civil  Procedure. Same  is the view of the Rajasthan High
Court in  the case  of M/s.  M.K.M. Moosa Bhai Amin, Kota v.
Rajasthan Textile Mills, Bhawanimandi, A.I.R. 1974 Rajasthan
194 where  it was  held that where a limited company carried
on a business in an assumed name and a suit came to be filed
against the  defendant in  that name in respect of price due
on sale	 of goods  in view  of section	3(42) of the General
Clauses Act,  1897 the	expression 'person'  as used  in the
Code of	 Civil Procedure  order 30 Rule 10 in the suit filed
against the  defendant in  the name  assumed by	 the limited
company was  tenable under  order 30  Rule 10 of the Code of
Civil Procedure. The Kerala High Court, however, in the case
of Educational	Supplies Depot,	 Trivandrum v.	Vithoba High
School and others, [1970] Kerala Law Journal Reports 43 held
that a decree could not be passed against a school as it was
not a  juristic entity	much less a person to hold property.
It may	be mentioned  that subsequently the Kailash Chemical
and Textile  Mills Ltd.	 has changed its name to the Haryana
Milk Food  Corporation and  they have  merged formerly,	 but
that is	 subsequent to	the lease and the institution of the
suit. It  is manifest  from the	 position that	parties knew
that Kailash  Chemical and  Textile Mills Ltd. was the owner
of the	Haryana Milk  Food Corporation. Kailash Chemical and
Textile Mills  Ltd., accepted  that position  as it would be
apparent  from	 the  grounds  filed  before  the  Appellate
Authority. Mr.	Garg, learned  counsel	for  the  appellant,
however, tried	to emphasise  that in view of the definition
of tenant
116
under section  2(i) of	the Rent  Act the  right of eviction
under section 13 in the suit as framed was not maintainable.
     It has  been held	by all	the Courts  that the parties
knew who were the tenants, it is apparent that the appellant
was not	 the tenant. It was held by the Rent Controller that
one of	the grounds  for eviction  was bona fide need of the
landlord. The Appellate Authority and the High Court did not
go into	 this question.	 The parties  were  aware  that	 the
Kailash Chemical  and Textile Mills Ltd., was the real owner
of the	Haryana Milk  Food Corporation. Neither Haryana Milk
Food Corporation  nor Kailash Chemical and Textile Mills was
prejudiced by  holding that the lessee was not the appellant
and they  have not been pre-judiced by not being made formal
parties. In  the  aforesaid  view  of  the  matter,  we	 are
inclined not to interfere with the order of eviction.
     It has to be borne in mind that this is an appeal under
Article	 136  of  the  Constitution.  This  Court  in  Heavy
Engineering Corporation Ltd. Ranchi v. K. Singh and Company,
Ranchi, A.I.R. 1977 Supreme Court 2031 expressed the opinion
that although  the powers  of this  Court  were	 wide  under
Article 136  it could  not be  urged that  because leave had
been granted  the Court	 must always in every case deal with
the merits  even though	 it was	 satisfied that	 the ends of
justice did not justify its interference in a given case. It
is not	as if,	in an  appeal with  leave under Article 136,
this Court  was bound  to decide the question if on facts at
the later  hearing the	Court felt  that the ends of justice
did not	 make it necessary to decide the point. Similarly in
Baigana and  others v. Deputy Collector of Consolidation and
others, [  1978] 3  S.C.R. 509 this Court expressed the view
that this  Court  was  more  than  a  Court  of	 appeal.  It
exercises power	 only when  there is supreme need. It is not
the fifth court of appeal but the final court of the nation.
Therefore, even	 if  legal  flaws  might  be  electronically
detected, we  cannot interfere	save manifest  injustice  or
substantial question  of public	 importance. In this case it
is apparent  from the  facts placed  before us	and the High
Court and  the courts  below that there is a genuine need of
the landlady  for the  premises in  question.  It  has	been
established clearly  that the tenancy agreement was not with
the appellant  and the	lease was signed by the appellant on
behalf of  other entity though not strictly legal but it was
entered by  a legal  entitly, namely  Kailash  Chemical	 and
Textile Mills Ltd. It has been held that no deposit had been
made in	 accodance with	 law by three Courts. Merely because
in the	form of the lease Kailash Chemical and Textile Mills
Ltd., was  not mentioned and as such was not made a party to
the suit  and the  lease was purported to be entered with an
entity which is not a
117
juristic person	 and a	suit was  filed	 against  such	non-
juristic person,  this Court  should not  interfere with the
conclusions arrived  at by  the learned	 Appellate Authority
and the	 High Court.  It has  to be  borne in mind that this
Court in  exercising its  power under  Article	136  of	 the
Constitution acts  not only  as a court of law but also as a
court of  equity and  must subserve  ultimately the cause of
justice. In  this case, there is evidence that there is some
bona fide  need of the landlady for her family. After a long
lapse of  time, in  the facts  and the circumstances of this
case we decline to interfere with the findings arrived at by
the High Court and the Courts below.
     We, therefore,  dismiss this appeal, but we direct that
in case	 the landlady,	respondent No. 1 herein lets out the
premises within	 a period  of five  years the  first  option
should be  given to  the appellant.  We further	 direct	 and
record the  undertaking of  the landlady  that she would not
sell the premises within a period of five years, and in case
she does  the first  option should be given to the appellant
to purchase  the property. We further direct that the decree
for eviction  will not be executed upto 31st of August, 1988
provided the appellant files an undertaking to this Court in
the usual  form within	four weeks  from this  date. We also
direct that the occupation charges or mesne profits from 1st
of August,  1987 should	 be paid  to the respondent No. 1 at
the rate  of Rs.800  per month and the first of such payment
should	be  made  on  the  30th	 September,  1987  and	each
subsequent payment should be made on 15th of each subsequent
month. In  default of  filing the  undertaking or not making
the payment  as hereinbefore indicated the order of eviction
will become executable forthwith.
     The  appeal,  therefore,  fails  and  it  is  dismissed
subject to  the conditions  indicated hereinbefore.  In	 the
facts and  circumstances  of  this  case,  the	parties	 are
directed to pay and bear their own costs.
P.S.S.					   Appeal dismissed.
118




