

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
State Of West Bengal vs Sree Sree Ma Engineering & Anr on 8 September, 1987Equivalent citations: 1987 AIR 2229, 1988 SCR  (1)	 69
Author: S Mukharji
Bench: Mukharji, Sabyasachi (J)
           PETITIONER:
STATE OF WEST BENGAL

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
SREE SREE MA ENGINEERING & ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT08/09/1987

BENCH:
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)
BENCH:
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)
OZA, G.L. (J)

CITATION:
 1987 AIR 2229		  1988 SCR  (1)	 69
 1987 SCC  (4) 452	  JT 1987 (3)	553
 1987 SCALE  (2)507


ACT:
     Arbitration Act, 1940:
     Sections  14   to	16,  28	 and  30-Unsigned  award  by
Arbitrator-Whether can	be made	 rule of  the  Court-Whether
Court can  cure this  formal defect  by remitting  award for
signature.



HEADNOTE:
     There was	a dispute  between the	first respondent and
the appellant  in respect  of Silt  Clearance of River Peali
from Uttarbhag	Canning Road  Bridge up to Hobon Sluice. The
matter was  referred to	 the Arbitrator, who made his award.
The respondent	was paid  a sum	 of Rs.32,525.62 in terms of
the award, and a true copy of the award was forwarded to the
Court.
     The  first	  respondent  filed   an  application  under
Sections 14,  15, 16   and  30 of the Arbitration Act, 1940,
for setting  aside the	award. A  Single Judge	of the	High
Court dismissed	 the application  and passsed  a judgment in
terms of  the award.  The Division  Bench having allowed the
appeal of  the respondent,  the matter	again came up before
the  Single  Judge,  who  allowed  the	application  of	 the
respondent under  Section 5,  11  and  12  of  the  Act	 and
appointed a retire Judge of the High Court as arbitrator and
later revoked  the authority  of  the  said  arbitrator	 and
appointed a lawyer of the High Court as arbitrator.
     The appellant filed an appeal against the said decision
to the	Division Bench,	 which held  that as  there  was  an
extension of  time in  making the award and the award having
been filed  within the	extended time,	the  award  was	 not
beyond time.  However, it  held that an unsigned award could
not be made a rule of the Court.
     Disposing of the appeal by special leave, this Court,
^
     HELD: Under  law, the  mandatory rule is that the award
should be  signed by  the Arbitrator.  No doubt	 an unsigned
award cannot  be made  a rule of the Court. But it is only a
formal defect.	The Court, in such circumstances, can extend
time for making the award and direct
70
curing of  the formal  defect in the award. So much time and
effort should  not be allowed to go waste. Law must subserve
justice and endeavour to serve the purpose of law. [71 F-G]
     In the  instant case,  the award was handed over to the
parties and  a letter  was sent to the parties concerned and
award bore no signature of the Arbitrator. The parties acted
upon the  award. In  a situation  of this nature, the proper
order in  the interest	of justice  would be  to  remit	 the
award, under Section 16 of the Arbitration Act, for enabling
the Arbitrator	named therein  for signing the award and for
that purpose  if it  is necessary  under Section  28 of	 the
Arbitration Act,  the Court has the power to extend the time
to the Arbitrator for making the award final.[71F. H; 72A-B]
     Accordingly, the  time is	extended by  four months and
the award remitted to the Arbitrator for signature. [72B]



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 2190 of
1987.
     From the  Judgment and Order dated 29th August, 1986 of
the Calcutta High Court in Appeal No. 204 of 1986.
     Amal Dutta, D.K. Sinha and J.R. Das for the Appellant.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     SABYASACHI MUKHARJI, J. Special leave granted.
     This is  an appeal challenging the decision of the High
Court of  Calcutta upholding  the decision  of	the  learned
Single	Judge  of  that	 Court	whereby	 the  award  of	 the
arbitrator was	set aside  and new arbitrator was appointed.
In order to appreciate the position it is necessary to state
that in	 the year  1964 the  Executive Engineer	 had invited
competitive sealed  tenders in respect of "Silt Clearance of
River Peali  from Utterbhag  Canning Road  Bridge upto Hobon
Sluice". Shri  D.P. Chatterjee	entered upon  the  reference
soon thereafter and the award was made in November, 1966. It
appears that  thereafter the  respondent asked for the award
amount in  full and  final settlement  which  the  Executive
Engineer turned	 down. The respondent herein was paid by the
appellant a  sum of  Rs.32,525.62 in  terms of the award and
which sum  was received	 and acknowledged  by the respondent
No. 1.	Then the true copy of the award was forwarded to the
Court by  the Chief  Executive Engineer	 and the application
was
71
filed by  the respondent  No. 1 in 1981 in the High Court of
Calcutta under	Sections 14,  15, 16 & 30 of the Arbitration
Act, 1940  for	setting	 aside	the  award  dated  the	19th
November, 1966.	 The High  Court after	hearing the  parties
dismissed that application on 10th May, 1982. The High Court
was thereafter	pleased to  pass judgment  in terms  of	 the
award. The respondent herein preferred an appeal against the
judgment dated	10.5.82.  The  Division	 Bench	allowed	 the
appeal of  the appellant.  The appellant's  advocate did not
notice that the matter appeared in the daily list dated 26th
April, 1985  of the learned Single Judge for judgment and as
such he	 did not know the result of the judgment. Thereafter
the matter  again appeared in the list of the learned Single
Judge and  the respondent had made an application before the
learned Single	Judge for  setting aside the previous order.
The learned  Single Judge  on 18th  March, 1986 rejected the
application of	the appellant and allowed the application of
the respondent	herein under  Section S,  11 and  12 of	 the
Arbitration Act	 and appointed	a retired  Judge of the High
Court as the arbitrator and thereafter revoked the authority
of the	said arbitrator	 from acting  as the  arbitrator and
appointed a  lawyer of the High Court as the arbitrator. The
appellant preferred  an appeal	against the said order dated
the 3rd December, 1985 before the Division Bench of the High
Court of Calcutta.
     Two points were raised before the learned Single Judge,
firstly that  the award	 was beyond  time and  secondly, the
learned arbitrator  had not  signed the	 award. The Division
Bench found that as there was an extension of time in making
the award  and	the  award  having  been  filed	 within	 the
extended time, expressed the view that there was no force in
the first  point. The Division Bench, however, was unable to
accept unsigned award being made the rule of the Court.
     It is  true that  an unsigned  award cannot be made the
rule of	 the Court.  But it  is only  a	 formal	 defect.  It
appears that  the award was handed over to the parties and a
letter was  sent to  the parties concerned and award bore no
signature of  the arbitrator. The parties had acted upon the
award. It  is true  that under the law the mandatory rule is
that the  award should	be signed by the arbitrator. But law
must subserve  justice and endeavour to serve the purpose of
law. The  Court can  in such  circumstances extend  time for
making the  award and  direct curing of the formal defect in
the award.  So much time and effort should not be allowed to
go waste.
     In the situation of this nature the proper order in the
interest of H
72
justice would  be to remit the award under Section 16 of the
Arbitration Act,  1940 for  enabling  the  arbitrator  named
therein for  signing the award and for that purpose if it is
necessary under Section 28 of the Arbitration Act, 1940, the
Court has the power to extend the time to the arbitrator for
making the  award final.  We did  so. We  extend the time by
four months  from today	 and direct the award be remitted to
the arbitrator for signature.
     The appeal is disposed of accordingly.
N.P.V.					 Appeal disposed of.
73




