

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Samunder Singh vs State Of Rajasthan & Others on 12 January, 1987Equivalent citations: 1987 AIR  737, 1987 SCR  (1) 979
Author: M Thakkar
Bench: Thakkar, M.P. (J)
           PETITIONER:
SAMUNDER SINGH

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF RAJASTHAN & OTHERS

DATE OF JUDGMENT12/01/1987

BENCH:
THAKKAR, M.P. (J)
BENCH:
THAKKAR, M.P. (J)
RAY, B.C. (J)

CITATION:
 1987 AIR  737		  1987 SCR  (1) 979
 1987 SCC  (1) 466	  JT 1987 (1)	141
 1987 SCALE  (1)66


ACT:
    Code  of Criminal Procedure,  1973:	 s.438--Anticipatory
bail--When not to be granted.



HEADNOTE:
    While  the matter regarding the unnatural death  of	 the
daughter in-law at the house of her father-in-law was  still
under investigation the High Court grunted anticipatory bail
to the accused in disregard of the magnitude and seriousness
of the matter.
    Subsequent to the filing of the appeal by special  leave
by  the	 father of the deceased the investigation  had	been
concluded  by the police and challan filed, and the  accused
were released on bail by the Chief Judicial Magistrate.
Dismissing the appeal as infructuous, the Court,
    HELD: The High Court was under no compulsion to exercise
its  jurisdiction to grant anticipatory bail in a matter  of
this nature. [980D]
    The	 appropriate course to adopt was to allow  the	con-
cerned Magistrate to deal with the case on the basis of	 the
material before him at the point of time of accused's arrest
in  case  they	were arrested. It  was,	 therefore,  neither
prudent nor proper for the High Court to have granted antic-
ipatory bail which order was very likely to occasion  preju-
dice by its very nature and timing. [980B-D]



JUDGMENT:
    CRIMINAL	APPELLATE   JURISDICTION:   Criminal  Appeal
No. 22 of 1987.
    From  the  Judgment and Order dated	 29.10.1986  of	 the
Rajasthan High Court in Crl. M.B.A. No. 1395/86
    Gopal  Subramaniam, A.M. Garg and R.  Venkataramani	 for
the Petitioner.
Dalveer Bhandari for the Respondents.
980
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
    THAKKAR, J. The widespread belief that dowry deaths	 are
even now treated with some casualness at all levels seems to
be  well grounded. The High Court has  granted	anticipatory
bail  in such a matter. We are of the opinion that the	High
Court should not have exercised its jurisdiction to  release
the accused on anticipatory bail in disregard of the  magni-
tude and seriousness of the matter. The matter regarding the
unnatural  death of the daughter-in-law at the house of	 her
father-in-law  was still under investigation and the  appro-
priate course to adopt was to allow the concerned Magistrate
to  deal with the same on the basis of the  material  before
the Court at the point of time of their arrest in case	they
were  arrested.	 It was neither prudent nor proper  for	 the
High Court to have granted anticipatory bail which order was
very  likely  to occasion prejudice by its very	 nature	 and
timing. We therefore consider it essential to sound a  seri-
ous  note of caution for future. The High Court is under  no
compulsion to exercise its jurisdiction to grant anticipato-
ry  bail in a matter of this nature. So far as	the  present
matter is concerned, since it has become infructuous, we  do
not  propose  to pass any order. Subject to  these  observa-
tions, the appeal is dismissed.
P.S.S.						      Appeal
dismissed.
981




