

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Kotak & Co vs State Of U.P on 8 January, 1987Equivalent citations: 1987 AIR  738, 1987 SCR  (1) 926
Author: M Thakkar
Bench: Thakkar, M.P. (J)
           PETITIONER:
KOTAK & CO.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF U.P.

DATE OF JUDGMENT08/01/1987

BENCH:
THAKKAR, M.P. (J)
BENCH:
THAKKAR, M.P. (J)
RAY, B.C. (J)

CITATION:
 1987 AIR  738		  1987 SCR  (1) 926
 1987 SCC  (1) 455	  JT 1987 (1)	124
 1987 SCALE  (1)12


ACT:
    Civil  Procedure  Code,  1908--s.73--Rateable  distribu-
tion--Order passed by Court--Rights of parties are  crystal-
ized--State cannot claim statutory priority after Court	 has
made its order.



HEADNOTE:
    On the question whether from the point of time an  order
for  rateable distribution is passed by the executing  Court
the  monies  in	 question cease to be the  property  of	 the
judgment-debtor and become the property of the	decree-hold-
er, regardless of whether or not actual payment pursuant  to
the said order is made:
Allowing the Appeal,
    HELD:  1. As soon as the question of rateable  distribu-
tion between the decree-holders and the State having  statu-
tory  priority is determined, and the Court passes an  order
as to how to appropriate the assets of the  judgment-debtor,
the rights of the parties become crystalized and the  monies
in question cease to be the property of the  judgment-debtor
and becomes the property of the decree-holder, regardless of
whether or not actual payment pursuant to the said order  is
made. [930A-B]
    Official  Receiver of Tanjore v. M.R. Venkatarama  lyer,
AIR  1922 Madras p. 31, Murli Tahilram v. T. Asoomal &	Co.,
AIR  1955  Calcutta p. 423, Basanta Kumar  Bhattacharjee  v.
Panchu	Gopal  Dutta  & Ors., AIR 1956 Calcutta	 p.  23	 and
Income-tax  Officer,  Ward C. SangIi &	Anr.  v.  Chandanbai
Balaram Doshi & Ors., AIR 1957 Bombay p. 91, approved.
    2.1	 The  rights  of the  respective  decree-holders  or
claimants  are governed by the order for rateable  distribu-
tion passed by the Court as a result of the adjudication and
determination made by the Court. Nothing further remains  to
be done by the Court, in the judicial sphere thereafter. The
order  partakes	 of the character of a judgment	 and  decree
passed by the Court. [930B-C]
927
    2.2	 Thereafter the officials of the Accounts  and	Cash
department are only required to carry out the command of the
Court by implementing or giving effect to the order.  [930C-
D]
    2.3 The test which is to be applied is whether the	said
officials  can refuse to implement the order by refusing  to
make payment once the Court has passed the order.  Obviously
and  undoubtedly  they cannot. Therefore, nothing  turns  on
whether	 or not actual payment pursuant to the order of	 the
Court  is  made.  The Court officials make  payment  to	 the
decree-holder  because the property in the said	 monies	 has
vested	unto  them by virtue of the  order  of	distribution
passed by the Court. What is being paid by the officials  of
Accounts  and  Cash  Sections will  be	the  decree-holder's
money, it having ceased to belong to the judgmentdebtor	 the
moment	the  order for distribution was	 made,	even  though
actual disbursement was made later. [930D-F]
    3.	If  the	 State lays its claim after  the  order	 for
distribution  is made by the Court, it will be of no  avail,
as  the	 property would have gone beyond the  reach  of	 the
State,	it  having ceased to be the property of	 the  debtor
against whom the State had a claim. No question of  priority
can  arise  in that situation--the state having	 missed	 the
bus. [930F-G]
    4.	In the present case, the High Court was in error  in
reversing the order passed by the executing Court. The order
of  the	 High Court is set aside and that of  the  executing
Court  restored	 in so far as the  appellant  is  concerned.
[930H]



JUDGMENT:
    CIVIL  APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 1295  of
1973
    From  the  Judgment and Order dated 14.12. 1972  of	 the
Allahabad  High	 Court in Civil Revn. Petition No.  1572  of
1969.
P.H. Parekh and Suhail Dutt for the Appellant.
    Prithvi Raj, Mrs. Shobha Dikshit and Sudhir	 Kulshreshta
for the Respondent.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
    THAKKAR, J. The proposition canvassed by the  appellant,
namely, that from the point of time that an order for  rate-
able  distribution  is	passed by the  executing  court	 the
monies in question cease to be
928
the property of the judgment-debtor and 'become the property
of  the decree-holder, regardless of whether or	 not  actual
payment pursuant to the said order is made, is supported  by
the decisions of three High Courts namely, Madras,  Calcutta
and  Bombay.  As early as in 1922 the Madras High  Court  in
Official Receiver of Tanjore v. M.R. Venkatararna lyer,	 AIR
1922 Madras p. 31 has taken the view canvassed by the appel-
lant as is evident from the passage quoted hereunder:-
      "It  seems  to me that from the time of the  order  of
rateable  distribution the money must be treated as  belong-
ing,  not to the judgment-debtor, Nataraja lyer, but to	 the
decreeholder  in  whose	 favour the order  was	passed.	 Mr.
Devadoss for appellant contended that the effect of a  rate-
able  distribution order is merely to allocate the money  to
the  different	suits without affecting its  ownership.	 The
latter,	 he says, still rests in the judgment-debtor by	 the
sate of whose property it was allocated. I do not think this
is so. The section does not speak of distribution among	 the
decree-holders.	 The latter are entitled to draw it  out  at
will; and the judgment-debtor most certainly is not. I think
the  money in this case must be treated as the	property  of
the  decree-holder,  the  present respondent  and  that	 the
Official Receiver could no more recover it from the respond-
ent  if it had actually been paid out to him by	 court.	 Mr.
Devadoss  eventually admitted that he could not recover	 the
money  in  the circumstances of the present case if  it	 had
passed	into  respondent's possession. I would	dismiss	 the
appeal with costs."
    A  learned Single Judge of the Calcutta High  Court	 has
expressed  the same view in Murli Tahilram v. T. Asoornal  &
Co., AIR 1955 Calcutta p. 423, wherein it is observed:-
"But  where a private citizen has sued another	to  judgment
and has in fact got by an order of Court a Receiver appoint-
ed of his goods and such goods have been sold by the Receiv-
er  under  orders of the Court and where there	has  been  a
prior  direction in the Court's order to pay the  sale	pro-
ceeds  to the private judgment-creditor, a subsequent  claim
by  the	 State for arrears of sales-tax	 cannot	 defeat	 the
judgment-creditor or deprive him of the fruits of his decree
which is regarded as property."
929
And the same view has been reiterated by a Division Bench of
the  Calcutta High Court in Basanta Kumar  Bhattacharjee  v.
Panchu Gopal Dutta & Ors., AIR 1956 Calcutta p. 23 where  in
the  Court has made recourse to the following  reasoning  to
support the proposition:
     "This  contention, we think, should prevail. The  order
allowing the application for rateable distribution that	 was
passed on 2-12-1953 should, we think, be reasonably read  as
deciding  that	the decree-holders had title to	 the  money.
What remained to be done was the ascertainment of the  exact
amount which each decree-holder was entitled to and  payment
of the same. The decision as regards title had already	been
made  and with the decision that 'the money was the  decree-
holder's  money, the position, in our opinion, was  that  it
could  no  longer be considered in law to be  the  judgment-
debtor's  money.  The question of priority  of	the  State's
claim  does not, therefore, fail to be decided. On the	date
the  letter  of attachment of the  Certificate	Officer	 was
received,  there  was no money belonging  to  the  judgment-
debtors in the hands of the Court."
The  High  Court of Allahabad which has	 differed  from	 the
aforesaid  High	 Courts	 by the judgment  under	 appeal	 has
proceeded  on the assumption that the High Court  of  Bombay
has  taken  a contrary view in Income-tax Officer,  Ward  C,
Sangli	& Ant. v. Chandanbai Balaram Doshi & Ors., AIR	1957
Bombay p. 91. We are afraid, by the High Court of Bombay  in
the  said case the principle enunciated has  been  misunder-
stood. No order for rateable distribution had been passed by
the  executing court in the said case. Even, so, while	dis-
cussing the law on the subject in the context of the  scheme
of the C.P.C., the High Court of Bombay has articulated	 the
principle thus:-
"The  scheme clearly indicates that,   until the  Court	 has
directed  appropriation of the amount to the claim  made  by
the  decree-holder  or	of creditors  entitled	to  rateable
distribution,  the  amount received in	Court  continues  to
remain as of the judgment-debtor."
					(Emphasis added)
By  necessary implication it means that as soon as an  order
for rateable distribution is made, the amount ordered to  be
distributed will cease to
930
be  the property of the judgment-debtor. We are of the	same
opinion	 as that of the High Courts of Madras, Calcutta	 and
Bombay.	 As  soon as the question of  rateable	distribution
between	 the decree-holders and the State  having  statutory
priority is determined, and the Court passes an order as  to
how  to appropriate the assets of the  judgment-debtor,	 the
rights of the parties become crystalized. What then  remains
is to give effect to the determination made by the court  by
officials  in charge of concerned departments  dealing	with
Accounts and Cash which is a ministerial act. The rights  of
the  respective decree-holders or claimants are governed  by
the order for rateable distribution passed by the Court as a
result	of  the adjudication and determination made  by	 the
Court.	Nothing further remains to be done by the  Court  in
the  judicial sphere thereafter. The order partakes  of	 the
character of a judgment and decree passed by the Court. What
the  officials of the Accounts and Cash department  are	 re-
quired	to do thereafter is to carry out the command of	 the
Court  by  implementing or giving effect to the	 order.	 The
test  which can be usefully applied is to pose the  question
whether the said officials can refuse to implement the order
by  refusing to make payment once the Court has	 passed	 the
order.	Obviously and undoubtedly they cannot. Therefore  it
is  evident  that  nothing turns on whether  or	 not  actual
payment pursuant to the order of the Court is made. And when
the Court officials make payment to 'the decree-holder, they
make  payment  because the property in the said	 monies	 has
vested	unto  them by virtue of the  order  of	distribution
passed by the Court. What is being paid by the officials  of
Accounts  and  Cash  Sections will  be	the  decree-holder's
money, it having ceased to belong to the judgment-debtor the
moment	the  order  for distribution  was  made,  eventhough
actual	disbursement was made later. If the State  lays	 its
claim after the order for distribution is made by the Court,
it  will  be  of no avail as the property  Would  have	gone
beyond	the reach of the State, it having ceased to  be	 the
property  of the debtor against whom the State had a  claim.
No  question  of priority can arise in	that  situation--the
State having missed the bus. In the present case, the amount
had  ceased to be the property of the  judgment-debtor	from
the point of time that the order forateable distribution was
passed by the executing court. There was no question  there-
fore  of the State being entitled to claim priority  in	 re-
spect of the claims lodged by it subsequent to the order for
rateable  distribution. The High Court was thus in error  in
reversing the order passed by the executing court.
    We, therefore, allow the appeal, set aside the order  of
the High Court in so far as the appellant is concerned,	 and
restore the order of
 931
the executing court in so far as the appellant is concerned.
    The appeal is disposed of accordingly. There will be  no
order as to costs.
A.P.J.					       Appeal	dis-
posed of.
932




