

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Ram Adhar Singh (Dead) Through ... vs Bansi (Dead) Through Lrs. & Ors on 6 March, 1987Equivalent citations: 1987 AIR  987, 1987 SCR  (2) 595
Author: A Sen
Bench: Sen, A.P. (J)
           PETITIONER:
RAM ADHAR SINGH (DEAD) THROUGH LRS. & ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
BANSI (DEAD) THROUGH LRS. & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT06/03/1987

BENCH:
SEN, A.P. (J)
BENCH:
SEN, A.P. (J)
ERADI, V. BALAKRISHNA (J)

CITATION:
 1987 AIR  987		  1987 SCR  (2) 595
 1987 SCC  (2) 482	  JT 1987 (1)	704
 1987 SCALE  (1)577


ACT:
    U.P.   Zamindari   Abolition  and  Land   Reforms	Act,
1951--Section 21(1)(d)--Usufructuary mortgage by an occupan-
cy  tenant--Not valid in eye of law--Mortgagee	entitled  to
retain possession only till repayment of mortgage debt.
    Recovery  of Rents (Bengal) Act, 1859---Section  6--Usu-
fructuary mortage of occupancy holding--Impermissible.
    U.P.  Debt Redemption Act, 1940--All usufructuary  mort-
gages became self-liquidating mortgages.



HEADNOTE:
    The	 first	respondent's suit under Section 202  of	 the
U.P.  Zamindari	 Abolition and Land Reforms  Act,  1951	 for
possessing on payment of the mortgage money and ejectment of
the appellants under Section 21(1)(d) of the Act was resist-
ed  on the ground that the right of redemption stood  extin-
guished in the year 1929 as the usufructuary mortgage  which
was executed when the Recovery of Rents (Bengal), Act,	1859
was in force, was a valid one and the mortgagors, the prede-
cessors	 in  interest of the respondent had lost  all  their
rights titles and interest in the land. The Judicial Officer
dismissed the suit.
    On appeal, the Additional Commissioner decreed the first
respondent-plaintiff's	suit holding that  the	usufructuary
mortgage  of occupancy rights was valid only in a  qualified
sense in that the appellants were entitled to retain posses-
sion  until the mortgage debt was paid and that	 no  tenancy
law  right from the Recovery of Rents (Bengal) Act, 1859  to
U.P. Tenancy Act, 1939 ever made the occupancy rights trans-
ferable.
    The	 appeal	 to the Board of Revenue  having  been	dis-
missed,	 the appellants moved the High Court  under  Article
226 and a Single Judge of the High Court dismissed the	writ
petition and upheld the order of the Board of Revenue.
596
    On appeal, the Division Bench held that the	 transaction
of  the present kind was not a mortgage	 properly  so-called
but  yet  was  a  mortgage within  the	meaning	 of  Section
21(1)(d) of the Act.
    In appeal to this Court, challenging the correctness  of
the  view of the High Court, it was contended that both	 the
Board of Revenue as well as the High Court failed to  appre-
ciate that the usufructuary mortgage in question was execut-
ed  at a time when the Recovery of Rents (Bengal) Act,	1859
was  in	 force, and that a usufructuary mortgage  was  valid
under Section 6 of the Act.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court,
    HELD:  1.1 The settled law as administered in  the	then
United	Provinces  was that a usufructuary  mortgage  of  an
occupancy  holding was invalid and there was no transfer  of
an  interest by the occupancy tenant and the  mortgagee	 ac-
quired	no right other than the right to  retain  possession
and fail back upon the stipulation in the so-called mortgage
bond till his money was paid. [599C-D]
    1.2 The view that a usufructuary mortgage by an occupan-
cy tenant was not valid in the eye of law has been  accepted
by  the	 Legislature in clause (d) of Section 21(1)  of	 the
U.P. Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1951 and	 the
matter stands concluded by the doctrine of stare decisis. To
hold  otherwise now would imply not only unsettling the	 law
which  has  stood the test of time for over  100  years	 but
would  have  the effect of reopening transactions  past	 and
closed and unsettling titles. [599D-E]
    2.1	 There	is nothing in Section 6 of the	Recovery  of
Rents  (Bengal) Act to suggest that a usufructuary  mortgage
of an occupancy holding like the transaction in question was
permissible. [599F]
    2.2	 The right of occupancy tenant was not	transferable
under  Section 6 of the Act and in case of such	 a  transfer
the  tenant  would he deemed to have abandoned	the  holding
and,  therefore, the right of an occupancy tenant cannot  be
set  up by the purchaser in defence to a suit for  ejectment
by the zamindar. [600B]
    3. In the instant case, the relationship of the  parties
was regulated by the stipulations contained in the  mortgage
bond  and  under the terms the appellants were	entitled  to
retain possession till the mortgage debt was paid off. Under
the U.P. Debt Redemption Act, 1940, all
597
usufructuary  mortgages became	serf-liquidating  mortgages.
The  mortgage money would be deemed to have been  paid	off.
[600F-G]
    Narendra  Narayan  Roy Chowdhary v. Ishan  Chandra	Sen,
[1974] 13 Bengal LR 278; Khiali Ram v. Nathu Lal, ILR [1893]
15  All	 219  (FB); Samharu v. Dharamraj  Pandey  and  Ors.,
[1969]	All. LJ 943 (FB); Barhu Singh & Ors. v. Kharpattu  &
Ors., [1956], All LJ 87 and Ram Prasad v. Bishambhar  Singh,
AIR 1946 All 400, referred to.



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 188
of 1974.
    From the Judgment and Decree dated 25.8.72 of the  Alla-
habad High Court in Special Appeal No. 223 of 1966.
P.P. Juneja for the Appellant.
    Mrs. Rani Chhabra and Mrs. Rachna Gupta for the Respond-
ents.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
    SEN,  J. The short question involved in this' appeal  on
certificate  is	 whether a Division Bench of  the  Allahabad
High Court was right in following the decision of an earlier
Division  Bench in Barhu Singh & Ors. v. Kharpattu  &  Ors.,
[1956]	All LJ 87, which was later reiterated in Samheru  v.
Dharamraj  Pandey  & Ors., [1969] All LJ 943  (FB),  that  a
usufructuary mortgage of an occupancy holding was not  valid
as  a  mortgage with all its incidents and  subject  to	 the
provisions  of law relating to usufructuary  mortgages,	 but
was valid only to the limited extent that the mortgagee	 was
entitled  only	to retain possession of the  land  mortgaged
till there was repayment of the mortgage debt.
    The question arose in proceedings in a suit under  s.202
of  the U.P. Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act,	1951
for  possession on payment of the mortgage money brought  by
respondent No. 1 Bansi claiming himself to be an heir of the
original  mortgagors Sheo Balak and Ram Phal, on the  ground
that  the appellants who were the successors-in-interest  of
the  original mortgagee Bhairo Singh, had become asamis	 and
therefore  liable to ejectment under s.21(1)(d) of the	Act.
The suit was resisted by the appellants on the ground  inter
alia that the usufructuary mortgage deed dated July 21, 1869
having	been  executed when the Recovery of  Rents  (Bengal)
Act, 1859 was in force,
598
was a valid one and therefore the fight of redemption  stood
extinguished  in  the  year 1929 as a result  of  which	 the
mortgagors  Sheo  Balak and Ram Phal,  the  predecessors-in-
interest of the respondents lost all their right, title	 and
interest  in the land and thus the appellants could  not  be
treated	 as asamis liable to ejectment under  s.21(1)(d)  of
the  Act  but  had indeed become sirdars.  That	 defence  of
theirs	weighed with the Judicial Officer, Varanasi  who  by
his  judgment  dated May 11, 1960 dismissed  the  plaintiffs
suit.  On appeal by the respondents, the Additional  Commis-
sioner,	 Varanasi Division, Varanasi by his  judgment  dated
October	 10, 1960 decreed the plaintiff's suit holding	that
the usufructuary mortgage of occupancy rights was valid only
in a qualified sense in that the appellants were entitled to
retain	possession  until the mortgage debt  was  paid.	 The
learned Additional Commissioner observed that no tenancy law
fight from the Recovery of Rents (Bengal) Act, 1859 to	U.P.
Tenancy Act, 1939 ever made the occupancy fights  transfera-
ble.  The  appellants preferred an appeal to  the  Board  of
Revenue but Shri S.N. Mitra, ICS, Judicial Member, Board  of
Revenue	 by  his  judgment and order dated  April  25,	1963
dismissed  the appeal. The appellants moved the	 High  Court
under  Art.  226 of the Constitution but  a  learned  Single
Judge by his judgment dated February 28, 1966 dismissed	 the
writ petition and upheld the order of the Board of  Revenue.
On  appeal,  a	Division Bench following  the  decisions  in
Khiali	Ram v. Nathu Lal, ILR (1893) 15 All 219 (FB),  Barhu
Singh  v. Kharpattu (supra) and Samharu v. Dharamraj  Pandey
(supra)	 held that the transaction of the present  kind	 was
not  a	mortgage properly so-called but yet was	 a  mortgage
within the meaning of s.21(1)(d) of the Act.
    Shri Juneja, learned counsel for the appellants, who are
successors-in-interest	of  the	 original  mortgagee  Bhairo
Singh  strenuously assails the correctness of that view	 and
contends that both the Board of Revenue as well as the	High
Court failed to appreciate that the usufructuary mortgage of
the occupancy holding in question was executed by Sheo Balak
and  Ram Phal, the predecessors-in-interest of the  respond-
ents,  on Asadh Sudi 12 Samvat 1925, corresponding  to	July
21, 1860 i.e. at a time when the Recovery of Rents  (Bengal)
Act,  1859  was in force. He presses  into  service  certain
observations  of Sir Richard Couch, CJ in  Narendra  Narayan
Roy Chowdhary v. Ishan Chandra Sen, [1974] 13 Bengal LR	 278
for  the submission that a usufructuary mortgage  was  valid
under  s.6 of that Act. We find it difficult to	 accept	 the
contention.
We find that it has been the consistent view of the  Allaha-
bad
599
High  Court  that a usufructuary mortgage  of  an  occupancy
holding	 was not valid as a mortgage with all its  incidents
and subject to the provisions of law relating to  usufructu-
ary mortgage but was valid only in a qualified sense i.e. in
the  sense of subletting with a covenant that the  mortgagor
will  not be entitled to recover possession without  payment
of  the mortgage money, and further that under such a  mort-
gage  there  is	 no transfer of the right  of  an  occupancy
tenant and consequently no suit for redemption was maintain-
able  nor  was there any extinguishment of the right  of  an
occupancy tenant upon the expiry of the period of limitation
fixed  for redemption under Art. 148 of the Limitation	Act,
1908.  There is a long catena of decisions dealing with	 the
question starting from Khiali Ram v. Nathu Lal (supra)	down
to  Samharu v. Dharamraj Pandey (supra). It follows that  it
has been the settled law as administered in the then  United
Provinces  that	 a  usufructuary mortgage  of  an  occupancy
holding was invalid and there was no transer of an  interest
by  the occupancy tenant and the mortgage acquired no  other
right  other  than the right to retain possession  and	fall
back  upon  the stipulation in the so-called  mortgage	bond
till  his money was paid. As pointed out in the	 Full  Bench
decision  in Samharu v. Dharamraj Pandey (supra),  the	view
that a usufructuary mortgage by an occupancy tenant was	 not
valid in the eye of law has been accepted by the Legislature
in cl.(d) of s.21(1) of the U.P. Zamindari Abolition &	Land
Reforms	 Act,  195  1. The matter stands  concluded  by	 the
doctrine  of stare decisis. If we were to subscribe  to	 the
contention  advanced by the learned counsel for	 the  appel-
lants, it would imply not only unsettling the law which	 has
stood  the test time for over 100 years but have the  effect
of  reopening  transactions past and closed  and  unsettling
titles all over the State.
    We	also find no substance in the  contention  advanced.
There  is nothing in s.6 of the Recovery of  Rents  (Bengal)
Act to suggest that a usufructuary mortgage of an  occupancy
holding	 like the transaction in question  was	permissible.
Sir  Richard  Couch,  CJ in the course of  his	judgment  in
Narendra Narayan Roy Chowdhary's case has referred to s.6 of
that  Act which, in terms, made the holding of an  occupancy
tenant	a  non-transferable tenure. After referring  to	 the
provision  contained in s.6 which provided for conferral  of
occupancy rights on a ryot who was in cultivating possession
of  his	 land for a period of 12 years,	 the  learned  Chief
Justice unequivocally stated that the occupancy rights	were
not transferable:
"The ordinary construction of the word appears to me to	 be,
that the right is only to be in the person who has
600
occupied  for 12 years, and it was not intended to give	 any
right of property which could be transferred."
After  holding	that the right of occupancy tenant  was	 not
transferable under s.6 of the Act, the learned Chief Justice
went  on  to observe that in case of such  a  transfer,	 the
tenant	would  be deemed to have abandoned the	holding	 and
therefore the right of an occupancy tenant cannot be set  up
by  the purchaser in defence to a suit for ejectment by	 the
zamindar:
	      "Now,  if a ryot having a right  of  occupancy
	      endeavours  to transfer it to another  person,
	      and, in fact, quits his occupation, and ceases
	      himself  to  cultivate or hold  the  land,  it
	      appears  to me that he may be rightly  consid-
	      ered  to	have abandoned his right,  and	that
	      nothing is left in him which would prevent the
	      zamindar	from recovering the possession	from
	      the person who claims under the transfer."
That very eminent Judge explained this in another way:
	      "(I)f  the right which is given by the law  is
	      one  which exists only so long as he holds  or
	      cultivates  the  land, when he  ceases  to  do
	      that,  by selling his supposed right and	put-
	      ting  another in his place, his fight is	gone
	      and cannot stand in the way of the  landlord's
	      recovering possession."
We  fail to appreciate how these observations can be of	 any
avail  to  the appellants. The view expressed by  Couch,  CJ
that  the  right  of an occupancy tenant under	s.6  of	 the
Recovery  of Rents (Bengal) Act does not lay down  any	con-
trary  principle.  As to the question  of  abandonment,	 the
relationship  of the parties was regulated by  the  stipula-
tions contained in the mortgage bond and under the terms the
appellants  were  entitled  to retain  possession  till	 the
mortgage  debt was paid of. we wish to point out that  under
the  U.P. Debt Redemption Act, 1940 all	 usufructuary  mort-
gages became self-liquidating mortgages. As held by the High
Court  in Ram Prasad v. Bishambhar Singh, AIR 1946 All	400,
the mortgage money would be deemed to have been paid off.
For  these  reasons, the appeal must fail and  is  dismissed
with costs.
N.P.V.						      Appeal
dismissed.
?601




