

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
M. Satyanandam vs Deputy Secretary To The ... on 17 July, 1987Equivalent citations: 1987 AIR 1968, 1987 SCR  (3) 566
Author: S Mukharji
Bench: Mukharji, Sabyasachi (J)
           PETITIONER:
M. SATYANANDAM

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
DEPUTY SECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OFANDHRA PRADESH & ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT17/07/1987

BENCH:
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)
BENCH:
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)
OZA, G.L. (J)

CITATION:
 1987 AIR 1968		  1987 SCR  (3) 566
 1987 SCC  (3) 574	  JT 1987 (3)	127
 1987 SCALE  (2)97


ACT:
    Administrative  Law--Release of possession	of  premises
held  by  Government--Government  has power  to	 review	 its
earlier	 order by taking subsequent events  into  considera-
tion.



HEADNOTE:
    The	 petitioner was an allottee of the premises held  by
the  Government at the relevant time. The  landlady  applied
for  release of the premises but the request  was  rejected.
However, upon a further representation made by the  landlady
stating	 that her son was not allowing her to live with	 him
in  another house belonging to her, the Government  made  an
order  releasing  the premises in her favour and  asked	 the
petitioner to vacate the premises. Several notices were also
issued to him in that behalf. The petitioner challenged	 the
order  of release contending that he had not been  given  an
opportunity  to show cause, and, that the Government had  no
power to review its earlier order rejecting the request; but
the petition was dismissed by the High Court.
Dismissing the petition for Special Leave to appeal.
    HELD: It is well settled law of this Court that in	case
of  bona  fide need, subsequent events must  be	 taken	into
account	 if they are relevant to the question of release  of
possession of the premises. The contention that the  Govern-
ment  cannot review its own order cannot be accepted.  When,
in spite of the'notices given to him, the petitioner did not
choose to move out of the premises it cannot be said that he
was not given an opportunity to show cause. [567B-C]



JUDGMENT:
    CIVIL  APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Special  Leave  Petition
(Civil) No. 7213 of 1987.
    From  the  Judgment and Order dated 19.5.  1987  of	 the
Andhra Pradesh High Court in W.A. No. 672 of 1987.
P.P. Rao and P.P. Singh for the Appellant.
 567
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
    SABYASACHI MUKHARJI, J. This petition arises out of	 the
judgment and order of the High Court of Andhra Pradesh. Sree
P.P.  Rao, learned counsel for the petitioner  submits	that
the order of release was bad because the authorised  officer
had  no	 power to review the previous order nor he  had	 the
power  to release the property of the landlady without	even
giving	an  opportunity to the petitioner. In the  facts  of
this  case  as	noted by the High Court, we  are  unable  to
entertain  these  contentions. We are unable to	 accept	 the
contention that the Government cannot review its own  order.
It  is well-settled law of this Court that in case  of	bona
fide  need subsequent events must be taken into	 account  if
they  are relevant on the question of release or  possession
of  the	 premises in question. On a  previous  occasion	 the
Government  had	 declined  to release  the  premises,  later
on  .the representation made by the landlady the  Government
changed its decision. The landlady had filed an	 application
for  releasing the premises in her favour, but the same	 was
initially  rejected on 25.9.1978. Again the landlady made  a
further representation stating certain additional and  fresh
circumstances, that is to say, that her son was not allowing
her to live with him in another house belonging to her.	 The
Government  took  into	account the  subsequent	 events	 and
passed	the  order on 19.3. 1980 releasing the	premises  in
favour of the landlady. We do not see how to take cognizance
of  such  subsequent events releasing the  premises  can  be
described an order in nullity in the facts of this case.
    The	 next  contention  was that the	 petitioner  was  an
allottee  of the premises by virtue of his being in  service
but  the petitioner was really a tenant of the	premises  in
question.
    The Government informed the petitioner to make  alterna-
tive  arrangements  or seek  accommodation.  The  Government
issued several notices on 24.11.1978, 22.5.1979,  12.7.1979,
27.9.1970  and 17.1.1980 to the petitioner and	these  facts
have  been  stated and have also been taken note of  by	 the
High Court in the judgment under challenge. In spite of	 the
said notices given to the petitioner who was an allottee and
who was informed about the requirement of the landlady,	 the
petitioner did not choose to move out from the premises.  In
the  meantime,	the petitioner has retired from	 service  in
1986 and a long time has passed now. In this case we do	 not
think  it  can be said that the order was  bad	because	 the
petitioner  was initially not given an opportunity  to	show
cause.	Actually the petitioner had enough  opportunity.  In
the premises, the special leave petition fails and we do
568
not find any ground to interfere with the order of the	High
Court.
    Having  regard  to	the facts that	the  petitioner	 had
acquired  government accommodation and he has stayed in	 the
premises  in  question for sometime, we allow  him  to	make
alternative  arrangement by 31.12.1987. The order for  evic-
tion  will  not be executed until  31.12.1987  provided	 the
petitioner  files an undertaking in this Court	within	four
weeks  from  today to vacate and hand over the	premises  in
question.
H.L.C.						    Petition
dismissed.
569




