

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Hindustan Steel Works ... vs C. Rajasekhar Rao on 27 July, 1987Equivalent citations: 1987 SCR  (3) 653, 1987 SCC  (4)	 93
Author: S Mukharji
Bench: Mukharji, Sabyasachi (J)
           PETITIONER:
HINDUSTAN STEEL WORKS CONSTRUCTION LTD.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
C. RAJASEKHAR RAO

DATE OF JUDGMENT27/07/1987

BENCH:
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)
BENCH:
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)
OZA, G.L. (J)

CITATION:
 1987 SCR  (3) 653	  1987 SCC  (4)	 93
 JT 1987 (3)   239	  1987 SCALE  (2)218


ACT:
    Arbitration	 Act, 1940: Sections 3, 28 and	33--Arbitra-
tion  proceedings-Not to be unduly prolonged--Whether  Court
has  power  to extend time for giving award after  award  is
made--Award--When  can	be set aside  Reasons not  given  by
arbitrator--Whether  court entitled to speculate  and  probe
mental process by which arbitrator reached conclusion.



HEADNOTE:
    There was an Agreement between the respondent-contractor
and the appellant-construction company in respect of certain
works.	Differences and disputes arose and there  were	pro-
ceedings  before the arbitrators named in the Agreement.  As
the arbitrators could not agree and there were	differences,
this  Court by an Order dated 16th June, 1983 directed	that
the arbitrators appointed by each of the parties be appoint-
ed  arbitrators	 and if there was disagreement	between	 the
arbitrators, the matter was to be referred to the Umpire. In
pursuance of the said directions the parties appeared before
the  arbitrators who referred the matter to the	 Umpire	 and
the  Umpire  after consideration made an  award	 dated	15th
July, 1985.
    The	 petitioner-construction company made a petition  to
this  Court  for a decree in terms of the award,  which	 was
opposed by the respondent-contractor contending that (a) the
Umpire	had made a speaking award and that the	validity  or
otherwise  of the said award was justifiable in a  Court  of
law, (b) that the Umpire had no jurisdiction to proceed with
the  arbitration  on  or about 18th December,  1984  as	 the
period of two months from the date of his entering upon	 the
reference had expired and consequently the award was  beyond
time,  and (c) that the award contained error of law on	 the
face of the award and there were inconsistent findings.
The Court while confirming the award,
    HELD: 1.1 The policy of law is that arbitration proceed-
ings should not be unduly prolonged. The arbitrator,  there-
fore,  has to give the award within the time prescribed,  or
such extended time as the
654
court concerned may in its discretion extend, and the  Court
alone had been given the power to extend the time for giving
the award. [656E]
    1.2	 The Court has got power to extend time	 even  after
the  award has been given or after the expiry of the  period
prescribed for the award. But the court has to exercise	 its
discretion  in a judicial manner. This power could be  exer-
cised even by the appellate court. [656F]
    1.3 The arbitrator gets the jurisdiction to enlarge	 the
time for making the award only in a case where after  enter-
ing  on	 the  arbitration, the parties	to  the	 arbitration
agreement consent to such enlargement of time. [657B]
    In	the instant case, in view of the policy of law	that
the  arbitration proceedings should not be unduly  prolonged
and  in view of the fact that the parties have	been  taking
willing part in the proceedings before the arbitrator  with-
out  a demur and had all along been willing to extend  time,
this  will be a fit case for the extension of time, and	 the
time  for giving the award is accordingly extended  and	 the
award will be deemed to have been given in time. [656F-G]
    2.1	 An  award might be set aside by the  court  on	 the
ground	of error on the face of the award, but an  award  is
not  invalid  merely because by a process of  inference	 and
argument,  it might be demonstrated that the arbitrator	 had
committed some mistake in arriving at his conclusion. [657D]
    Jivarajbhai	 Ujamshi  Sheth and others  v.	Chintamanrao
Balaji and others, [1964] 5 S.C.R. 480, followed.
    2.2	 Only in a speaking award the Court could took	into
the  reasoning of the award. It is not open to the Court  to
speculate, where no reasons are given by the arbitrator,  as
to what impelled him to arrive at his conclusion. It is also
not open to the Court to attempt to probe the mental process
by which the arbitrator had reached his conclusion where  it
is not disclosed by the terms of his award. [657D, H, 658A]
    The	 instant  case is not one of a speaking	 award.	 The
Umpire	had not spoken his mind indicating why he has  done,
what  he has done, he has narrated only how he came to	make
the  award.  No reasons have been given for the	 purpose  of
making the award. There is no legal proposition in the award
which  is  unsustainable or improper. The challenge  to	 the
award cannot, therefore, be accepted. [659G-H]
655
    State  of  Punjab v. Sri Hardyal, [1985] 3	S.C.R.	649;
H.K. Wattal v. V.N. Pandya, [1974] 1 S.C.R. 259 and Chempsay
Bhara  and  Company v. Jivraj Balloo  Spinning	and  Weaving
Company Ltd., L.R. 50 I.A. 324, referred to.
    CIVIL  APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Misc. Petition	 No.
28356 of 1986.
IN



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL APPEAL No. 5579 of 1983.
    From  the  Judgment	 and Order dated  22.4.1983  of	 the
Andhra	Pradesh High Court in Civil Rev. Petn. No.  2626  of
1982.
Dr. Shanker Ghose and P.P. Singh for the Appellant.
S. Markandeya and C. Markandeya for the Respondent.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
    SABYASACHI MUKHARJI, J. This is an application filed  by
the  Hindustan Steelworks Construction Company	Limited	 for
filing the award of the Umpire appointed by this Court, Shri
Justice	 Jaganmohan Reddy, retired Judge of this  Court	 and
for passing a decree in terms of the said award. It  appears
that there was an agreement between Shri Rajasekhar Rao, the
contractor and the Hindustan Steelworks Construction  Limit-
ed, petitioner, in respect of certain works. Differences and
disputes arose, and there were proceedings before the  arbi-
trator	named in the Agreement and there were  certain	pro-
ceedings, the detail of which is not necessary to refer.  As
the  arbitrators  could not agree, there  were	differences.
This  Court  by an order dated 16th of June,  1983  directed
that  arbitrators appointed by	each of the parties  be	 ap-
pointed	 arbitrator to adjudicate upon the  dispute  between
the  parties.  It was stipulated therein that  in  the	said
order of this Court dated 16th of June, 1983, it would be no
longer	open  to the party to question the validity  of	 the
appointment  of the arbitrators. In the event of  any  disa-
greement between the two arbitrators, Shri Jaganmohan Reddy,
a  former  Judge of this Court was directed to	act  as	 the
Umpire.	 Further consequential directions were	also  given.
Thereafter  the parties appeared before the arbitrators	 and
referred the matter to the umpire. The Umpire after  consid-
eration	 has made the award dated 15th of July,	 1985  which
has been filed in this
656
Court  and  the petitioner seeks a decree in  terms  of	 the
award.	The respondent-contractor, Shri Rajasekhar  Rao	 ob-
jects to the award being made a rule of the Court. He states
in his objections that the umpire had made a speaking award,
therefore according to his counsel the validity or otherwise
of the said award was justifiable in a court of law.
    He,	 however, firstly contends that the award  was	made
beyond	time.  He further contends that the  umpire  had  no
jurisdiction  to  proceed with the arbitration on  or  about
18th of December, 1984 as the period of two months from	 the
date  of  his entering upon the reference viz,	October	 20,
1984 had expired on December 18, 1984. According to the said
objections,  the umpire became functus-officio. It was	con-
tended	that the power to extend the period of	passing	 the
award was vested in the court alone under section 28 of	 the
Arbitration  Act and it was not permissible for the  parties
to  extend the time. We are unable to accept this  position.
Mr. Markendeya drew our attention to certain observations of
this  Court in the case of State of Punjab v.  Sri  Hardyal,
[1985]	3 S.C.R. 649. He relied on the observations  of	 the
Court at page 656 and emphasised that law precludes  parties
from  extending time after the matter had been	referred  to
the  arbitrator, it would be contradiction in terms to	hold
that  the same result could be brought about by the  conduct
of the parties. These observations, in our opinion, are	 out
of  the context. The policy of law is that  the	 arbitration
proceedings  should not be unduly prolonged. The  arbitrator
therefore  has to give the award within the time  prescribed
or  such  extended time as the court concerned	may  in	 its
discretion  extend  and the court alone has been  given	 the
power to extend time for giving the award. The court has got
the power to extend time even after the award has been given
or after the expiry of the period prescribed for the  award.
But  the court has to exercise its discretion in a  judicial
manner.	 In that case this Court found that the	 High  Court
was  justified in taking the view that it did.	This  power,
however, could be exercised even by the appellate court.  In
view  of the policy of law that the arbitration	 proceedings
should not be unduly prolonged and in view of the fact	that
the parties have been taking willing part in the proceedings
before the arbitrator without a demur and had all along been
willing	 to  extend time, this will be a fit  case,  in	 our
opinion,  for the extension of time. We	 accordingly  extend
the  time for giving the award and the award will be  deemed
to  have been given in time. In this case, it  appears	that
under section 28 and in the light of section 3 of the  First
Schedule the parties are allowed to extend the time. In this
connection  reference  may be made to H.K.  Wattal  v.	V.N.
Pandya, [1974] 1 S.C.R. 259, where this Court
657
reiterated that sub-section (2) of section 28 indicated	 one
exception  to  the above rule that the arbitrator could	 not
enlarge	 the time, and that was when the parties  agreed  to
such an enlargement. It is clear this Court reiterated	that
the arbitrator gets the jurisdiction to enlarge the time for
making the award only in a case where after entering on	 the
arbitration the parties to the arbitration agreement consent
to  such  enlargement  of time. In this	 case  precisely  it
happened. Furthermore the parties have proceeded before	 the
umpire	on that basis which is just and proper and  further-
more the time should be extended as was done in the case  of
State  of Punjab v. Sri Hardyal, (supra). In  the  aforesaid
view of the matter we are unable to accept the submission on
behalf	of Shri Markendeya that the award of the umpire	 was
beyond time.
     It was next contended that the award contained error of
law  on	 the face of the award and there  were	inconsistent
findings.  It has to be borne in mind that it was only in  a
speaking award that the court could look into the  reasoning
of  the award. In the case of Jivarajbhai Ujamshi Sheth	 and
others	v. Chintamanrao Balaji and others, [1964]  5  S.C.R.
480, this Court observed that an award might be set aside by
the  court on the ground of error on the face of the  award,
but an award was not invalid merely because by a process  of
inference  and	argument it might be demonstrated  that	 the
arbitrator  had	 committed some mistake in arriving  at	 his
conclusion.  The  law  on this point  is  well-settled.	 The
Judicial  Committee in Chempsey Bhara and Company v.  Jivraj
Balloo	Spinning and Weaving Company Ltd. L.R. 50  I.A.	 324
clarified  that	 an error of law on the face  of  the  award
means, that one could find in the award or a document  actu-
ally  incorporated thereto, as for instance a note  appended
by  the	 "arbitrator stating the reasons for  his  judgment,
some  legal proposition which is the basis of the award	 and
which one could then say was erroneous. It did not mean that
if in narrating a reference was made to a contention of	 one
party,	that opened the door to seeing first what that	con-
tention	 was,  and then going to the contract on  which	 the
parties'  rights  depended  to see if  that  contention	 was
sound". It has been further reiterated by this Court in	 the
aforesaid  decision relying on Chempsey Bhara and  Company's
case  (supra)  that in dealing with an	application  to	 set
aside  an  award the court had not to consider	whether	 the
view of the arbitratorr	 on the evidence was justified.	 The
arbitrator's  adjudication was generally considered  binding
between the parties, for he was the tribunal selected by the
parties	 and the power of the Court to set aside  the  award
was  restricted to cases set out in section 30 of the  Arbi-
tration	  Act.	It is not open to the  court  to  speculate,
where no reasons are
658
given by the arbitrator, as to what impelled the  arbitrator
to arrive at his conclusion. It is not open to the Court  to
attempt to probe the mental process by which the  arbitrator
had reached his conclusion where it is not disclosed by	 the
terms  of  his award. In this case this is  not	 a  speaking
award. The learned Umpire has not spoken his mind indicating
why he has done, what he has done, he has narrated only	 how
he came to make the award.
    Counsel drew our attention to page 26 of the award where
different items have been set out and referred to page 30 of
the award where the arbitrator noted as under:
			"The  Respondent demurs to this	 and
	      its officers have denied having received	them
	      in their affidavits and in their oral testimo-
	      ny.  No officer of the Post Office from  which
	      the  letter was sent by Registered Post or  of
	      the Post Office through which delivery of that
	      Registered letter was effected to the address-
	      ee  has been summoned to establish that  these
	      letters  did not emanate from their  Post	 Of-
	      fices or that the Post Office seals affixed on
	      the  "Certificates  of  Posting"	and  "Postal
	      Acknowledgements"	 were  not  of	those	Post
	      Offices  which delivered them to HSCL or	that
	      they  were forged or fraudulent, nor was	any-
	      thing  produced  to show that these  were	 not
	      posted  or  registered from the  Post  Offices
	      from which they emanated".
    Counsel  further drew our attention to the statement  at
page  33 of the award about the losses. Mr. Markandeya	con-
tended	that  these were the reasons given  by	the  learned
umpire. We are unable to accept. What the learned umpire did
in  the	 aforesaid paragraphs was to narrate the  facts	 and
state the history and state of pleadings. The umpire in	 the
operative part of the award observed as under:
		       "WHEREAS I perused and considered the
	      entire  record with great care  including	 the
	      record  of affidavits, the oral evidence	ten-
	      dered before me, the statement of claim  dated
	      12.10.1983;   the	  counter-statements   dated
	      27/31-101983 and the Rejoinder of the claimant
	      and considered the documents filed in  support
	      of the case of the respective parties as	also
	      the  written and oral submissions made  before
	      me  by counsel for the parties in	 support  of
	      their  respective	 cases of  the	parties	 for
	      which they have
	      659
	      appeared;	 and  having  duly  considered	 the
	      dispute in its varied aspects placed before me
	      by the parties and in the light of the  entire
	      material in the case as above narrated.
		       I.P.JAGANMOHAN  REDDY,  the   Umpire,
	      nominated	 by  the Supreme Court of  India  as
	      aforesaid, and having jurisdiction to  adjudi-
	      cate  the dispute between the parties  in	 the
	      claims  and  counter-claims relating  to	Work
	      Orders  Nos. 3, 4, 5, 6 and 8  concerning	 the
	      Glass  Factory and Works Orders Nos. 9 and  10
	      concerning Lamp Factory and the contention  of
	      the claimant and the respondent in respect  of
	      the said Claims and counter claims.
		       (1) I DO HEREBY MAKE MY AWARD,  order
	      and  direct that the Respondent do pay to	 the
	      claimant	a  sum	of  Rs.31,740-30p.   (Rupees
	      thirty  one thousand seven hundred  and  forty
	      and thirty paise) only in full satisfaction of
	      its liability for the claim made by the Claim-
	      ant-Contractor  against  the  Respondent	with
	      interest at the rate of six per cent per annum
	      from the date of Award.
		       (2)  I further award and direct	that
	      the  counter-claims made by the respondent  do
	      stand dismissed.
		       (3)  I further award and direct	that
	      the  parties  do bear their  respective  costs
	      incidental to these proceedings.
		       (4) I further direct that the amounts
	      paid  by the parties towards the heating	fees
	      etc.,  from  time to time in  respect  of	 the
	      several heatings of these arbitration proceed-
	      ings and the amount in deposit be appropriated
	      and  has/ have accordingly  been	appropriated
	      towards the remuneration of the Umpire".
    Therefore, in his award as a whole no reasons have	been
given  for the purpose of making the award. In other  words,
it  is not a speaking award at all. The Award did not  speak
as  to	why the umpire has awarded as he did.  It  does	 not
speak the mind of the umpire. It mentions the events leading
to the making of the award. In the award, there is no  legal
proposition which is unsustainable or improper. In that view
of the matter the challenge to the award cannot be accepted.
660
    In the premises, the objections are rejected. There will
be  decree  in	terms of the award of the  Umpire,  Shri  P.
Jaganmohan Reddy. There will be interest on the judgment  at
9%  until realisation. The applicant will have the costs  of
this application.
N.P.V.					    Award Confirmed.
661




