

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
State Of Gujarat vs Akhilesh C. Bhargav & Ors on 26 August, 1987Equivalent citations: 1987 AIR 2135, 1987 SCR  (3)1091
Author: M Rangnath
Bench: Misra Rangnath
           PETITIONER:
STATE OF GUJARAT

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
AKHILESH C. BHARGAV & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT26/08/1987

BENCH:
MISRA RANGNATH
BENCH:
MISRA RANGNATH
DUTT, M.M. (J)

CITATION:
 1987 AIR 2135		  1987 SCR  (3)1091
 1987 SCC  (4) 482	  1987 SCALE  (2)428


ACT:
    Indian  Police  Service (Probation) Rules,	1954:  Rules
3(1),  3(3)  and 12(bb)--Probationer continuing	 in  service
beyond period of probation--Effect of--Discharge from  serv-
ice of such probationer-Whether valid.
Administrative Law:
    Service  Rules--Administrative  Instructions  issued  to
cover gap where there be vacuum or lacuna--Whether valid.



HEADNOTE:
    The first respondent was appointed to the Indian  Police
Service on 4.7.1969 and allotted to the Gujarat State Cadre.
He  was on probation and there was no order of extention  of
probation.  He	was discharged by the impugned	order  dated
9.4.74.
    The	 order	of discharge was assailed by the  first	 re-
spondent.  A  Single Judge of the High	Court  annulled	 the
order. Two appeals were preferred by the Union of India	 and
the  State  to	the Division Bench which came  to  the	same
conclusion, though for different reasons.
	 The State filed an appeal before this Court,  which
was resisted by the respondent, contending that reference to
Rule 12(bb) of the Indian Police Service (Probation)  Rules,
1954  brought into the otherwise innocuous order  stigma  in
sufficient  measure  warranting a proceeding of	 the  nature
contemplated  under  Article 311(2) of the  Constitution  of
India and that the respondent should have been treated as  a
confirmed  officer  of the cadre at the time  the  order  of
discharge was made.
    On behalf of the State it was contended that no order of
extension  of  probation  was necessary to be  made  as	 the
process	 of confirmation was not automatic and even  if	 the
two  year period as provided in Rule 3(1) of  the  Probation
Rules had expired, confirmation would not ipso facto  follow
and a special order had to be made.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court,
1092
    HELD: 1. The first respondent having become a confirmed
officer	 of the Gujarat IPS cadre, under Rule 12(bb) of	 the
Indian Police Service Rules, 1954 his services could not  be
brought	 to an end by an order of discharge since  the	said
Rules had no application for officer confirmed in the cadre.
Proceedings  in accordance with law were, therefore,  neces-
sary to terminate his service. [1096A-C]
    2.1	 While	the Probation Rules  prescribed	 an  initial
period	of two years of probation they did not	provide	 any
optimum	 period	 of probation.	Administrative	instructions
issued by the Government of India on 16th March, 1973  indi-
cating the guidelines to be followed in the matter laid down
that, save for exceptional reasons, the period of  probation
should	not be extended by more than one year and no  member
of  the service should, by convention, be kept on  probation
for  more  than	 double	 the normal  period  i.e.  4  years.
[1094F-G; 1095A-B]
    2.2	 Within	 the limits of executive  powers  under	 the
Constitutional	scheme it is open to the apropriate  Govern-
ment  to issue instructions to cover the gap where there  be
any vacuum or lacuna. Since instructions do not run  counter
to the rules in existence, the validity of the	instructions
cannot be disputed. [1095C]
    In the instant case, there was no order of extension and
the  order  of discharge is about five years after  the	 ap-
pointment. The respondent, therefore, stood confirmed in the
cadre on the relevant date when he was discharged. [1096A]
    Sant Ram Sharma v. State of Rajasthan and Anr., [1968] 1
SCR 111; State of Punjab v. Dharam Singh, [1968] 3 SCR 1 and
Moti  Ram  Deka etc. v. General	 Manager,  N.E.F.  Railways,
Maligaon, Pandu etc., [1964] 5 SCR 683, referred to.



JUDGMENT:
    CIVIL  APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 1273  of
1979.
    From  the  Judgment and Order dated	 10.11.1978  of	 the
Gujarat High Court in L.P.A. No. 206 of 1978.
    T.U.  Mehta,  G.A. Shah, Mrs. H. Wahi, M.N.	 Shroff	 and
K.M.M. Khan for the Appellant.
    S.N.  Kacker, Anil Kumar Gupta, Brij Bhushan Sharma	 and
N.P. Mahindra for Respondent No. 1.
	 1093
    V.C.  Mahajan,  C.	Ramesh and Miss	 A.  Subhashini	 for
Respondent No.2.
The following Order of the Court was delivered:
    This  appeal by Special leave is against  the  appellate
order  of  the	Division Bench of the  Gujarat	High  Court.
Respondent No. 1 was appointed to the Indian Police  Service
on  4.7. 1969 and has been discharged by the impugned  order
dated 9.4.1974. After he was appointed by the Union of India
he was allotted to the State cadre of Gujarat and the  order
of  discharge has been made on the basis of steps  taken  by
the State of Gujarat. The order of discharge was assailed by
filing	a writ petition under Article 226 of  the  Constitu-
tion.  The  Single  Judge annulled the order.  To  the	Writ
petition  both the Union of India and the State	 of  Gujarat
were party-respondents. Against the Single Judge's decision,
two appeals were preferred to the Division Bench. The  Divi-
sion  Bench for reasons mostly different from what had	been
recorded  by  the  learned Single Judge, came  to  the	same
conclusion.  Before this Court, there is only one appeal  by
the State of Gujarat and the Union of India has been  joined
as a respondent. Initially a preliminary objection had	been
raised	regarding the maintainability of the appeal  in	 the
absence	 of any appeal by the Union of India but Mr.  Kacker
appearing for respondent No. 1 has given up the same. It is,
therefore, not necessary to go into that question.
The order of discharge read as follows:
	      "Under  clause (bb) of Rule 12 of	 the  Indian
	      Police  Service (Probation) Rules,  1954,	 the
	      President hereby discharges Shri A.C. Bhargav,
	      a person appointed to the Indian Police  Serv-
	      ice,  on	probation,  on the  results  of	 the
	      I.A.S.  etc.  Examination held  in  1968,	 and
	      ,allocated  to  the service cadre	 of  Gujarat
	      from  the	 said service with effect  from	 the
	      date on which this order is served on the said
	      Shri A.C. Bhargav."
Reference to Rule 12(bb), it was contended on behalf of	 the
respondent,  brought  into  the	 otherwise  innocuous  order
stigma in sufficient measure warranting a proceeding of	 the
nature	contemplated under Article 311(2) of  the  Constitu-
tion.  It is unnecessary for us to go into that question  as
in our opinion the view expressed by the High Court is
1094
quite sound. We may refer to the Constitution Bench decision
of  this Court reported in the case of State of	 Orissa	 and
Anr. v. Ram Narayan Das, [1961] 1 SCR 606 wherein this Court
considered  the	 order of discharge of a police	 officer  on
probation and held that in the case of a probationer  obser-
vation	like  'unsatisfactory work and	conduct'  would	 not
amount to stigma.
    The	 other aspect which has been convassed before us  at
length	is  as to whether the respondent  should  have	been
treated as a confirmed officer of the cadre at the time	 the
order  of discharge was made. Admittedly, the order of	dis-
charge is about five years after the appointment.
    Rule  3(1)	of  the Indian	Police	Service	 (Probation)
Rules,	1954,  provides that every person recruited  to	 the
service	 in accordance with Indian Police Service  (Appoint-
ment by Competitive Examination) Regulations, 1955,   ......
shall be appointed to the service on probation for a  period
of two years. At the relevant time, sub-rule (3) of the said
Rules  provided	 that the Central Government may, if  it  so
thinks	fit in any case or class of cases extend the  period
of probation. Admittedly, in this case there was no order of
extention. It has been contended that no order of  extension
is  necessary to be made as the process of  confirmation  is
not automatic and even if the two year period as provided in
Rule  3(1)  has expired confirmation would  not	 ipso  facto
follow and a special order has to be made.
    Reliance  has  been placed on a series of  decisions  of
this Court which have held that an order of confirmation has
to be made and confirmation would not follow  automatically.
The position here, however, is somewhat different.
    While  the Probation Rules prescribed an initial  period
of  two	 years of probation it did not provide	any  optimum
period of probation. Administrative instructions were issued
by  the	 Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of  India,  on
16th  March, 1973, indicating the guidelines to be  followed
in the matter. The relevant portion thereof may be  extract-
ed:
	      ".......
	      (ii) It is not desirable that a member of	 the
	      service should be kept on probation for  years
	      as  happens occasionally at present. Save	 for
	      exceptional reasons, the period of proba-
		    1095
	      tion  should  not, therefore, be	extended  by
	      more than one year and no member of the  serv-
	      ice  should, by convertion, be kept on  proba-
	      tion  for more than double the  normal  period
	      i.e.  four years. Accordingly, a	probationer,
	      who does not complete the probationers'  final
	      examination  within  a period of	four  years,
	      should  ordinarily  be  discharged  from	 the
	      service."
    It is not disputed that the circular of the Home  Minis-
try was with reference to the Indian Police Service  (Proba-
tion) Rules. We have not been shown that these	instructions
run counter to the rules. It is well settled that within the
limits of executive powers under the Constitutional  scheme,
it  is open to the appropriate Government to issue  instruc-
tions to cover the gap where there be any vacuum or  lacuna.
Since instructions do not run counter to the rules in exist-
ence,  the validity of the instructions cannot be  disputed.
Reliance has been placed in the courts below on the  consti-
tution Bench Judgment of this Court, and which reported in [
2968]  1 SCR 111 (Sant Ram Sharma v. State of Rajasthan	 and
anr.) where Ramaswami J. speaking for the Court stated thus:
	      "	  .....	 We are unable to accept this  argu-
	      ment  as correct. It is true that there is  no
	      specific	provision in the Rules	laying	down
	      the principle of promotion of junior or
	      senior  grade  officers  to  selection   grade
	      posts. But that does not mean that till statu-
	      tory  rules  are	framed in  this	 behalf	 the
	      Government  cannot  issue	 administrative	 in-
	      structions  regarding  the  principles  to  be
	      followed	in promotions of the  officers	con-
	      cerned  to selection grade posts. It  is	true
	      that  Government	cannot	amend  or  supersede
	      statutory	 rules	by  administrative  instruc-
	      tions,  but  if the rules are  silent  on	 any
	      particular  point Government can fill  up	 the
	      gaps  and supplement the rules and  issue	 in-
	      structions  not  inconsistent with  the  rules
	      already framed.
    We are of the view that the rules read with instructions
create a situation as arose for consideration by this  Court
in the case of State of Punjab v. Dharam Singh, [1968] 3 SCR
1. The Constitution Bench of this Court in that case  inter-
preted the Punjab Educational Service (Provincialised Cadre)
Class III Rules and found that there was a maximum limit  of
three  years beyond which the period of probation could	 not
be  extended. When an officer appointed initially on  proba-
tion  was  found to be continuing in  service  beyond  three
years  without a written order of confirmation,	 this  Court
held that it tantamounts to confirmation. In view of what we
have stated above we are in argee-
1096
ment  with the High Court about the combined effect  of	 the
rules  and instructions. We hold that the  respondent  stood
confirmed  in  the cadre on the relevant date  when  he	 was
discharged. For a confirmed officer in the cadre, the Proba-
tion  Rules  did  not apply and	 therefore,  proceedings  in
accordance  with law, were necessary to	 terminate  service.
That exactly was the ratio of the decision in Moti Ram	Deka
etc.  v. General Manager, N.E.F. Railways,  Maligaon,  Pandu
etc., [1964] 5 SCR 683. On the analysis indicated above, the
net  result,  therefore, is that the respondent	 No.  1	 had
become	a confirmed officer of the Gujarat I.P.S. cadre	 and
under rule 12(bb) of the Probation Rules his services  could
not be brought to an end by the impugned order of discharge.
The appeal fails and is dismissed. There will be no order as
to costs.
N.P.V.						Appeal	dis-
missed.
1097




