

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Ram Kumar vs State Of Haryana on 20 August, 1987Equivalent citations: 1987 AIR 2043, 1987 SCR  (3)1057
Author: M Dutt
Bench: Dutt, M.M. (J)
           PETITIONER:
RAM KUMAR

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF HARYANA

DATE OF JUDGMENT20/08/1987

BENCH:
DUTT, M.M. (J)
BENCH:
DUTT, M.M. (J)
MISRA RANGNATH

CITATION:
 1987 AIR 2043		  1987 SCR  (3)1057
 1987 SCC  Supl.  582	  JT 1987 (3)	357
 1987 SCALE  (2)340


ACT:
    Civil    Services:	  Departmental	  enquiry--Punishing
authority  accepting finding of Enquiry Officer and  reasons
in support of finding--Order of termination by a  non-speak-
ing order--Whether valid.



HEADNOTE:
    The	 service  of  the appellant, a	bus  conductor,	 was
terminated consequent upon the enquiry conducted into  alle-
gations	 of non-issue of tickets to nine passengers,  though
fare  was collected from each of them. A suit filed  by	 the
appellant,  contending	that the order	of  termination	 was
illegal and void and was opposed to the principles of  natu-
ral  justice, as no reason was given in the order, was	dis-
missed	by the trial court. It was also held that the  Civil
Court had no jurisdiction to entertain and try the suit.
    The Additional District Judge, on appeal, held that	 the
Civil  Court had jurisdiction to entertain and try the	suit
and  set aside the impugned order of termination as  invalid
as it was a non-speaking order not containing any reason.
    In second appeal, the High Court affirmed the finding of
the Additional District Judge as to the jurisdiction of	 the
Civil  Court,  but set aside his finding that  the  impugned
order  was a non-speaking order and held that it  was  quite
legal and valid.
    In	the appeal to this Court it was contended on  behalf
of  the appellant that the punishing authority had  not	 ap-
plied his mind before passing the impugned order, which	 was
apparent  from the fact that he had not given any reason  in
justification  thereof	and this had vitiated  the  impugned
order of termination.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court,
    HELD:  When	 the  punishing authority  agrees  with	 the
findings  of  the Enquiry Officer who  accepts	the  reasons
given  by him in support of such findings, it is not  neces-
sary for the punishing authority to again
1058
discuss	 evidence and come to the same findings as  that  of
the Enquiry Officer and give the same reasons for  the-find-
ings. [1060E]
    In	the  instant case, it is difficult to say  that	 the
punishing authority had not applied his mind. The  punishing
authority has placed reliance upon the report of the Enquiry
Officer,  which means he has not only agreed with the  find-
ings  of the Enquiry Officer but also accepted	the  reasons
given by him for the same. When the punishing authority	 has
accepted the findings of the Enquiry Officer and the reasons
given by him, the question of non-compliance with the  prin-
ciples of natural justice does not arise. [1060E-F]
    It	cannot	be  said that the impugned order  is  not  a
speaking order and is vitiated. [1060F]
    [In view of the fact that it is the first offence of the
appellant, who is said to be the father of five minor  chil-
dren  and has no other means of livelihood,  the  respondent
may consider the re-employment of the appellant to the	post
of Conductor or to any other post, to which he may be  found
to be suitable.] [1060G-H]



JUDGMENT:
    CIVIL  APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 1870  of
1982.
    From the Judgment and Order dated 2.9.1981 of the Punjab
and Haryana High Court in R.S.A. No. 1556 of 1980.
V.M. Tarkunde and Prem Malhotra for the Appellant.
     S.C. Mohanta, Mahavir Singh and C.V. Subba Rao for	 the
Respondents.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     DUTT, J. In this appeal by special leave the appellant,
a Bus Conductor of the Haryana Roadways, has challenged	 the
validity  of the order of termination of his service on	 the
ground	of  failure of the punishing authority to  give	 any
reason for the impugned order in violation of the principles
of natural justice.
     A charge was levelled against the appellant that he did
not issue tickets to nine passengers, although he had  taken
the  fare from each of them. A disciplinary  proceeding	 was
started against the appellant. The
1059
Enquiry	 Officer, after considering the allegations  consti-
tuting the charge, the plea of the appellant in defence	 and
the evidence adduced by the parties including the appellant,
held  that the charge against the appellant was proved.	 The
punishing authority agreed with the findings of the  Enquiry
Officer and by the impugned order terminated the service  of
the appellant.
    Aggrieved,	the appellant filed a suit  challenging	 the
legality  of the order of termination. It was  contended  by
the  appellant that as no reason was given in  the  impugned
order,	it  was	 illegal and invalid being  opposed  to	 the
principles of natural justice. The Trial Court overruled the
said  contention and also held that the Civil Court  had  no
jurisdiction to entertain and try the suit. Accordingly, the
Trial Court dismissed the suit.
    On appeal, the learned Additional District Judge held in
disagreement  with  the	 Trial Court and,  in  our  opinion,
rightly	 that the Civil Court had jurisdiction to  entertain
and  try  the suit. The learned Additional  District  Judge,
however,  held	that the impugned order was  a	non-speaking
order  not  containing any reason and, as such, it  was	 in-
valid.	In that view of the matter, the	 learned  Additional
Judge  allowed	the appeal, set aside the  judgment  of	 the
Trial Court and the impugned order of termination of service
of the appellant and decreed the suit.
    The	 State of Haryana took the matter to the High  Court
in  a second appeal. The High Court affirmed the finding  of
the learned Additional District Judge as to the jurisdiction
of  the	 Civil	Court, but set aside his  finding  that	 the
impugned order was a non-speaking order. The High Court took
the view that the impugned order was quite legal and  valid.
Upon  the said findings. the High Court allowed	 the  appeal
and  set aside the judgment and decree of the learned  Addi-
tional District Judge. Hence this appeal by special leave.
    It	has  been  urged by Mr.	 Tarkunde,  learned  Counsel
appearing  on  behalf of the appellant, that  the  punishing
authority  has not applied his mind before passing  the	 im-
pugned	order, which is apparent from the fact that  he	 had
not given any reason in justification of the impugned order.
Counsel submits that non-application of the mind and failure
to  give any reason by the punishing authority vitiated	 the
impugned order of termination and, accordingly, it should be
set aside.
It has been pointed out by the High Court that the punishing
1060
authority  has	passed a lengthy order	running	 into  seven
pages  mentioning therein the contents of the  charge-sheet,
the detailed deposition of the witnesses, as accorded by the
Enquiry	 Officer, and the findings of the  Enquiry  Officer.
The  explanation  submitted by the appellant has  also	been
reproduced in the impugned order. Thereafter, the  punishing
authority stated as follows:-
	      "I have considered the charge-sheet, the reply
	      filed to the charge-sheet, the statements made
	      during  enquiry,	the report  of	the  Enquiry
	      Officer,	the  show cause	 notice,  the  reply
	      filed  by the delinquent and other papers	 and
	      that no reason is available to me on the basis
	      of  which	 reliance may not be placed  on	 the
	      report  of  the  Enquiry	Officer.  Therefore,
	      keeping these circumstances in view, I  termi-
	      nate his service with effect from the date  of
	      issue of this order."
    In	view  of the contents of the impugned order,  it  is
difficult  to say that the punishing authority had  not	 ap-
plied  his mind to the case before terminating the  services
of  the appellant. The punishing authority has placed  reli-
ance upon the report of the Enquiry Officer which means that
he  has	 not only agreed with the findings  of	the  Enquiry
Officer, but also has accepted the reasons given by him	 for
the  findings. In our opinion, when the punishing  authority
agrees with the findings of the Enquiry Officer and  accepts
the reasons given by him in support of such findings, it  is
not  necessary for the punishing authority to again  discuss
evidence  and come to the same findings as that of  the	 En-
quiry Officer and give the same reasons for the findings. We
are  unable to accept the contention made on behalf  of	 the
appellant that the impugned order of termination is vitiated
as  it	is  a non-speaking order and does  not	contain	 any
reason.	 When by the impugned order the punishing  authority
has  accepted  the findings of the Enquiry Officer  and	 the
reason given by him, the question of non-compliance with the
principles  of	natural justice does not arise. It  is	also
incorrect  to say that the impugned order is not a  speaking
order.
    There  is,	therefore, no substance in the	appeal.	 The
appeal is dismissed. There will, however, be no order as  to
costs.
    In view of the fact that it is the first offence of	 the
appellant, who is said to be the father of five minor  chil-
dren  and has no other means of livelihood,  the  respondent
may consider the re-employment of the appellant to the	post
of Conductor or to any other post, to which he may be  found
to be suitable.
N.P.V.						      Appeal
dismiss.ed.
1061




