

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Amritlal Ratilal Mehta & Anr vs State Of Gujarat on 16 November, 1979Equivalent citations: 1980 AIR  301, 1980 SCR  (2)	 72
Author: O C Reddy
Bench: Reddy, O. Chinnappa (J)
           PETITIONER:
AMRITLAL RATILAL MEHTA & ANR.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF GUJARAT

DATE OF JUDGMENT16/11/1979

BENCH:
REDDY, O. CHINNAPPA (J)
BENCH:
REDDY, O. CHINNAPPA (J)
SARKARIA, RANJIT SINGH

CITATION:
 1980 AIR  301		  1980 SCR  (2)	 72
 1980 SCC  (1) 121


ACT:
     Indian Penal  Code 1860 (Act 45 of 1860) Ss 34, 420 and
477-A-Accused charged  under section  420/34 &	section 477-
A/34-Acquittal	on   charge  under   section  477-In  appeal
confirmed-Acquittal  on	 charge	 under	section	 480-Whether
follows.
     Criminal Trial-Finding of fact finally determined at an
earlier stage  of case-At  later  stages-Binding  force	 and
conclusive nature of such finding.



HEADNOTE:
     The prosecution  alleged that  the appellants (accused)
who were  employees of a private company, willfully and with
an intention  to defraud the Central Excise Department, made
false declaration  in gate  passes which  were	prepared  by
Appellant No.  1 and  signed by	 Appellant  No.	 2,  secured
clearance of  dutiable	goods  without	payment	 of  Central
Excise Duty, and thereby caused wrongful loss to the Central
Excise Department.  They were  therefore charged with having
committed offences  punishable under  sections 420 read with
section 34  I.P.C. and	section 477-A  read with  section 34
I.P.C.
     The Magistrate who tried the case found that neither of
the accused  intended to  cheat and  make wrongful  gain but
that they  made a false entry in the gate passes with a view
to help	 their employers,  and acquitted both of them of the
charge under  section 420  read with  section 34  I.P.C. but
convicted them	under section  477-A read  with	 section  34
I.P.C. and sentenced them to pay fines.
     In the  appellants' appeal,  the Sessions	Judge  found
that the  gate passes  were prepared  by the accused under a
mistake, that  the worst that could be said against them was
that  they  acted  inadvertently  or  negligently  that	 the
expression "intent  to	defraud"  denoted  some	 element  of
dishonesty and	that the  appellants  having  acted  neither
willfully  not	 with  intent  to  defraud  the	 Government,
acquitted them	of the	charge under section 477-A read with
section 34.
     The State	filed two  appeals in  the High	 Court,	 one
against the  order of  acquittal recorded  by  the  Sessions
Judge on the charge under section 477-A read with section 34
I.P.C., and  the  other,  against  the	order  of  acquittal
recorded by  the Magistrate  on the charge under section 420
read with  section 34 I.P.C. The former appeal was dismissed
summarily by  a Division Bench, while the latter was allowed
by a  Single Judge who imposed a sentence of fine. The Judge
was of	the view  that the  acquittal of  the  charge  under
section 477-A  was not	a bar  to a conviction under section
420 as	the ingredients	 of the two offences were different,
and that  the gist  of the  offence under  section 477-A was
that the  false entries	 must have  been made  willfully and
with intent  to defraud	 whereas the  essence of the offence
under section  420 was	that the  accused should  have acted
dishonestly.
73
     In the appeal, to this Court it was contended on behalf
of the	appellants that the findings of fact recorded by the
Sessions Judge	on the	charge under section 477-A read with
section 34  I.P.C. having  become final	 as a  result of the
dismissal of  the appeal  by the  Division Bench, the charge
under  section	 420  read  with  section  34  I.P.C.  would
automatically fail.
     Allowing the appeal,
^
     HELD: 1.  The question  about the	binding force  of  a
finding at  an earlier stage would depend on the question as
to what	 the  allegations  were	 and  what  were  the  facts
required to be proved and what findings were arrived at. The
question is  not whether the ingredients of the two offences
are the same but whether the fact alleged and required to be
proved in  the particular case to establish the offences are
basically the same. [76 A-B]
     Bhagat Ram	 v. State  of Rajasthan [1972] 2 S.C.C. 466;
State of  Rajasthan v.	Tarachand Jain	[1974] 3  S.C.C.  72
referred to.
     In the  instant case the charges against the appellants
showed that  the  essential  allegation	 to  be	 proved	 was
whether the  gate passes  were made  'dishonestly' so far as
section 420  was concerned  and "with  intent to defraud" so
far as	the charge  under section  477-A  was  concerned.  A
finding that  the gate	passes were  made inadvertently	 and
negligently was destructive of both the charges.[76 C]
     2. If for the purpose of the offence under section 477-
A, the	court found  that the entries made by the accused in
the gate  passes were made inadvertently and negligently but
not willfully or with a view to defraud and that finding had
become final,  it would	 not be	 open to the court, later to
find, on the charge under section 420, that the entry on the
gate passes  was made not inadvertently and negligently, but
dishonestly. [76 D]
     3. The  acquittal of  the accused	having become final,
must operate  for the  benefit of  the accused	and lead  to
their acquittal on the charge under section 420 also. [76 E]



JUDGMENT:
     CRIMINAL APPELLATE	 JURISDICTION :	 Criminal Appeal No.
222 of 1973.
     Appeal by	Special Leave  from the	 Judgment and  Order
dated 27/28-2-73  of the  Gujarat  High	 Court	in  Criminal
Appeal No. 731/71.
     Frank Anthony and K.L. Hathi for the Appellant.
     R.H. Dhebar,  Miss Pratiloha Pandit and M.N. Shroff for
the Respondent.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     CHINNAPPA REDDY, J. To appreciate the question posed in
the present  appeal, it	 is necessary to set out in full the
two charges  framed against the two appellants. They were as
follows:-
     "I, Chandrakant  T.  Mashla,  Judicial  Magistrate	 2nd
Court, Baroda hereby charge you
	  (1)  Amritlal Ratilal Mehta
74
	  (2)	Gajanan Bhikhabhai  Gandhi both of Baroda as
	       follows:-
     That both	of you	Amritlal Ratilal  Mehta and  Gajanan
Bhikhabhai Gandhi  on or  about 21-12-65,  at Baroda cheated
the Central  Excise Department,	 Baroda	 in  furtherance  of
common intention  to cheat  the Government of excise duty of
Rs. 11450/-  (Eleven thousand  four hundred  and  fifty)  by
dishonestly making  false declaration in gate passes numbers
105, 104,  103, all  dated 21-12-65  which were prepared and
written by accused No. 1 and signed by accused No. 2 stating
therein: "Repaired  Motor  with	 our  replacing	 statore  or
Rotor" and  thereby dishonestly	 induced the  Central Excise
Inspector to  allow the	 clearance of  Electric	 Motor	Nos.
614193,	 614194,  614196  respectively	without	 payment  of
Central Excise	duty on	 the dutiable  parts  namely  Rotors
Numbers 41-40-42 which were manufactured by M/s. Joyto Ltd.,
Company Baroda	and were replaced by the said company in the
above Electric	Motors and  thereby got the clearance of the
above Electric	Motors without	payment	 of  Central  Excise
Duty, causing  thereby wrongful	 loss of  Rs 11450/-  to the
Central Excise	department and thereby both of you committed
offence punishable u/s. 420 read with s. 34 of I.P.C. within
cognizance of J.M.F.C., Baroda.
	  And also  that both  of you at about the same time
     and place	in furtherance	of common  intention in your
     capacity  is   employees  of  M/s.	 Joyto	Ltd.  Baroda
     willfully and  with an intention to defraud the Central
     Excise Department,	 Baroda made  false entries  in	 the
     gate  passes  as  mentioned  above	 belonging  to	your
     employer and  thereby committed  an offence  punishable
     u/s 477-A, r/w. Section 34 I.P.C. and within cognizance
     J.M.F.C., Baroda.	And thereby  direct that you both be
     tried for	the above  offences by	2nd Court, J.M.F.C.,
     Baroda."
     The learned Judicial First Class Magistrate, Baroda who
tried the  case acquitted  both the  accused of	 the  charge
under s. 420 read with s. 34 I.P.S. but convicted them under
s. 477A	 read with  s. 34  I.P.C. and  sentenced them to pay
fines of  Rs. 100/-  and Rs. 500/- respectively. The learned
Magistrate was	of the	view that  neither  of	the  accused
intended to  cheat and make wrongful gain but that they made
a false	 entry in  the gate passes with a view to help their
employer. The  two accused  preferred an appeal to the Extra
Additional Sessions  Judge,  Baroda.  The  learned  Sessions
Judge acquitted them of the charges under s. 477-A read with
s. 34 I.P.C. also. The learned Sessions Judge found that the
gate passes were prepared by the accused under a mistake and
that the worst that could be said against the two
75
accused was  that they	acted inadvertently  or negligently.
The learned Sessions Judge took the view that the expression
"intend to  defraud" denoted  some element of dishonesty and
that the  appellants acted  neither willfully  nor with	 the
intent to defraud the Government. The State of Gujarat filed
two appeals,  the  first  against  the	order  of  acquittal
recorded by  the learned  Judicial First  Class	 Magistrate,
Baroda on  the charge  under s.	 420 read with s. 34 I.P.C.,
and the	 second against	 the order  of acquittal recorded by
the learned  Extra Additional  Sessions Judge, Baroda on the
charge under  s. 477-A	read with  s. 34  I.P.C. The  appeal
against the  order of acquittal on the charge under s. 477-A
read with s. 34 I.P.C. was dismissed summarily on 13-3-72 by
J.M. Sheth  and A.A.  Dave, JJ. The appeal against the order
of acquittal  on the  charge under  s. 420  read with  s. 34
I.P.C. was  allowed on	27/28-2-73 by J.M. Sheth, J. and the
two accused  were sentenced  to pay  fines of  Rs. 300/- and
500/- respectively.  It is  against this  judgment  of	J.M.
Sheth, J.  that the  present appeal  has been  preferred  by
special leave of this Court.
     The principal submission of Shri Frank Anthony, learned
counsel for  the appellants was that in view of the findings
of fact	 recorded by  the Sessions Judge on the charge under
s. 477-A  read with s.34, which had become final as a result
of the	dismissal of  the appeal by Sheth and Dave, JJ., the
charge	under	s.  420	  read	with   s.  34	I.P.C.	must
automatically fail.  The learned  counsel submitted that the
judgment of  the High  Court convicting the appellants under
s. 420	read with  s. 34  I.P.C. was  patently wrong. We are
inclined to agree with the submission of Shri Frank Anthony.
     The learned  Judge of  the High  Court was	 of the view
that the  acquittal on	the charge  under s. 477-A was not a
bar to	a conviction  under s. 420 as the ingredients of the
two offences were different. According to the learned Judge,
the gist  of the  offence under	 s. 477-A was that the false
entries must  have been	 made willfully	 and with  intent to
defraud whereas	 the essence of the offence under s. 420 was
that the  accused should  have	acted  dishonestly.  We	 are
afraid that  the learned Judge entirely misdirected himself.
The question  here is not whether the ingredients of the two
offences are  the  same	 or  substantially  the	 same.	That
question would	be relevant  if the  plea was  one autrefois
acquit or autrefois convict. The question is not even one of
'issue	estoppel'  properly  so	 called	 as  there  were  no
separate trials.  The question	really is  about the binding
force and  the conclusive nature, at later stages of a case,
of a  finding of fact finally determined at an earlier stage
of the	case. The question is not res integra. In Bhagat Ram
v. State of Rajasthan(1) and State of Rajasthan v. Tarachand
76
Jain(1) it  has been  held by this Court, an earlier finding
which had  obtained finality  is binding  in the  subsequent
proceedings in	the case.  The question	 about	the  binding
force of  a finding  at an earlier stage would depend on the
question as  to what  the allegations  were, what facts were
required to be proved and what findings were arrived at. The
question thus  is not  whether the  ingredients of  the	 two
offences are  the same	but whether  the facts	alleged	 and
required to  be proved	in the	particular case to establish
the offences  are basically the same. The charges set out by
us at  the outset  show that  the essential allegation which
was required  to be proved in respect of the two charges was
whether the  gate passes  were made  'dishonestly' so far as
the charge  under s.  420 was  concerned and 'with intent to
defraud' so  far as  the charge under 477-A was concerned. A
finding that  the gate	passes were  made inadvertently	 and
negligently was	 destructive of both the charges. If for the
purpose of  the offence under s. 477-A, the Court found that
the entries made by the accused in the gate passes were made
inadvertently and  negligently but  not willfully  or with a
view to	 defraud and that finding became final, it would not
be open	 to the Court, later to find, on the charge under s.
420, that  the entries	on the	gate passes  were  made	 not
inadvertently and negligently, but dishonestly. On the facts
of the present case, we hold that the finding of fact to the
effect that  the gate  passes were  made  inadvertently	 and
negligently but	 not willfully	or with	 intent	 to  defraud
which led  to the  acquittal of	 the accused  on the  charge
under s.  477-A must,  that acquittal  having become  final,
operate for  the benefits  of the  accused and lead to their
acquittal on  the charge under s. 420 also. The finding that
the gate  passes were made inadvertently and negligently, as
we said,  was destructive  of the  charges under both s. 420
and  s.	  477-A.  The	appeal	is  therefore  allowed.	 The
appellants  are	  acquitted.  Their   bail  bonds   will  be
cancelled. Fines if any will be refunded.
N.V.K.					      Appeal allowed
77




