

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Cement Marketing Co. Of India Ltd vs Asstt. Commissioner Of ... on 30 October, 1979Equivalent citations: 1980 AIR  346, 1980 SCR  (1)1098
Author: P Bhagwati
Bench: Bhagwati, P.N.
           PETITIONER:
CEMENT MARKETING CO. OF INDIA LTD.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
ASSTT. COMMISSIONER OF SALES-TAX, INDORE & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT30/10/1979

BENCH:
BHAGWATI, P.N.
BENCH:
BHAGWATI, P.N.
PATHAK, R.S.

CITATION:
 1980 AIR  346		  1980 SCR  (1)1098
 1980 SCC  (1)	71
 CITATOR INFO :
 R	    1981 SC1887	 (3,17)


ACT:
     Madhya Pradesh  General Sales  Tax Act  1958,  S2(o)  &
Central Sales Tax Act 1956 S2(h)-'Sale Price'-Sale of cement
under Cement  Control Order-amount of 'freight'-whether part
of 'sale  price'  includible  in  taxable  turnover  of	 the
assessee.
     Madhya Pradesh  General  Sales  Tax  Act  1958,  S43  &
Central Sales  Tax Act	1956, S9(2)-'false' return-Bona fide
belief of  assessee that  that amount  of 'freight'  did not
form part  of the  'sale price'	 and not  includible in	 the
taxable turnover-penalty whether leviable.



HEADNOTE:
     The assessee  (appellant) effected certain transactions
of sale	 of cement  in accordance with the provisions of the
Cement Control	order.	The  amount  of	 freight  which	 was
included in  the 'free	on rail destination railway station'
price and  which was paid by the purchaser was deducted from
the price  shown in the invoices sent to the purchasers. The
assessee proceeding  on the basis that the amount of freight
did not	 form part  of the sale price and was not includible
in the	taxable turnover  did not  show it  in	the  returns
submitted by it.
     The Assistant  Commissioner of  Sales Tax took the view
that having  regard to	the provisions of the Cement Control
Order, the  amount of  freight formed part of the sale price
and was	 includible in the taxable turnover of the assessee,
and passed  two orders	of assessment, one under the Central
Sales Tax  Act 1956  and the  other under the Madhya Pradesh
General Sales Tax Act, 1958, including the amount of freight
in the taxable turnover of the assessee and levying tax upon
it and	also imposing  heavy penalty  on the assessee on the
ground that  the assessee  had failed  to  disclose  in	 its
returns the amount of freight as forming part of the taxable
turnover.
     In appeals	 to this  Court on  the	 questions  of:	 (1)
inclusion of  the amount  of freight in the taxable turnover
of the	assessee and  (2)  imposition  of  penalty  for	 not
showing the amount of freight as forming part of the taxable
turnover in the returns.
^
     HELD: 1.  (i) The	amount of freight formed part of the
sale price  within the	meaning of  the first  part  of	 the
definition of  that term  in  Section  2(o)  of	 the  Madhya
Pradesh General	 Sales Tax Act, 1958 and Section 2(h) of the
Central Sales,	Tax Act,  1956' and  was rightly included in
the taxable turnover of the assessee. [1101E]
     (ii) In  Hindustan Sugar  Mills v.	 State of  Rajasthan
[1979] 1  SCR 276  this Court  held that  by reason  of	 the
provisions of the Cement Control Order, 1967, which governed
the transactions  of sale  of cement  entered  into  by	 the
assessee the amount of freight formed part of the sale price
within the meaning
1099
of the	first part  of the definition of that term contained
in Section  2(p) of  the Rajasthan  Sales Tax  Act, 1954 and
Section 2(h)  of the  Central Sales  Tax Act,  1956 and	 was
includible in the taxable turnover of the assessee. The said
decision must equally apply under the Madhya Pradesh General
Sales Tax  Act, 1958,  as the  definition of 'sale price' in
Section 2(o)  of the  Madhya Pradesh  General Sales Tax Act,
1958 is	 materially in the same terms as Section 2(p) of the
Rajasthan Sales Tax Act, 1954. [1101C-E]
     2(i) The  Assistant Commissioner  of Sales	 Tax was not
justified in  imposing penalty on the assessee under Section
43 of  the Madhya  Pradesh General  Sales Tax  Act, 1958 and
section 9  sub-section (2)  of the  Central Sales Tax Act of
1956 as the assessee could not be said to have filed 'false'
returns when it did not include the amount of freight in the
taxable turnover shown in the returns. [1103C, B]
     (ii) Section 43 of the Madhya Pradesh General Sales Tax
Act, 1958  providing for imposition of penalty requires that
the assessee should have filed a 'false' return and a return
cannot be  said to  be 'false' unless there is an element of
deliberateness in  it. The Section being penal in character,
unless the  filing of an inaccurate return is accompanied by
a guilty  mind, the  section cannot  be invoked for imposing
penalty. [1102D, 1102H]
     (iii) Where  the assessee does not include a particular
item in the taxable turnover under a bonafide belief that he
is not	liable so  to include  it, it  would not be right to
condemn the  return as	a 'false' return inviting imposition
of penalty. [1102F]
     Hindustan Steel Ltd. v. State of Orissa, 25 S.T.C. 211,
referred to.
     In the  instant case,  the assessee did not include the
amount of  freight in  the taxable turnover under a bonafide
belief that  the amount	 of freight did not form part of the
sale price  and was  not includible in the taxable turnover.
The contention	of the	assessee through  out was  that on a
proper construction  of the  definition of  'sale price'  in
Section 2(o)  of the  Madhya Pradesh  General Sales Tax Act,
1958 and  Section 2(h)	of the	Central Sales Tax Act, 1956,
the amount of freight did not fall within the definition and
was not	 liable to  be included	 in the taxable turnover. It
cannot be said that this was a frivolous contention taken up
merely for  the purpose	 of avoiding  liability to tax. This
was a  highly arguable contention. The belief entertained by
the assessee that it was not liable to include the amount of
freight in  the taxable	 turnover could	 not be	 said to  be
malafide or unreasonable. It cannot, therefore, be said that
the assessee  filed 'false' returns necessitating imposition
of penalty. [1102A-D,E]



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal Nos. 191-193
of 1978.
     Appeals by	 Special Leave	from the  Judgment and Order
dated 28-12-77	of the	Assistant Commissioner of Sales Tax,
Indore in  R. C. No. IND/1/X/XIX/5 in case No. 118/72-73 for
the period 1-8-71 to 31-7-72, R. C. No. IND/I/1344 (Central)
in Case No. 84/72-73 for the period 1-8-71 to 31-7-72 and R.
C. No. IND/I/X/XIX/5 (TOT)
1100
in Case No. 118/72-73 for the period 15-11-71 to 31-7-72 and
rectified by orders dated 7-1-1978.
     V. S.  Desai (CA  191/78), B.  R. Agarwala	 and  P.  G.
Gokhale for the Appellant.
     S. K. Gambhir for the Respondent.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     BHAGWATI,	J.-These  appeals  by  special	leave  raise
common questions  of law  and  it  would  be  convenient  to
dispose them of by a single judgment.
     The assessee  effected certain  transactions of sale of
cement in  accordance with  the	 provisions  of	 the  Cement
Control Order  during the assessment period Ist August, 1971
to 31st	 July, 1972  and in  the course of the assessment of
the assessee  to sales	tax under the Madhya Pradesh General
Sales Tax  Act, 1958  and Central  Sales Tax  Act,  1956,  a
question arose	whether the  amount  of	 freight  which	 was
included in  the 'free	on rail destination railway station'
price, but  which was  paid  by	 the  purchasers  and  hence
deducted from  the price  shown in  the invoices sent to the
purchasers, formed part of the sale price so as to be liable
to be  included in the taxable turnover of the assessee. The
assessee, proceeding on the basis that the amount of freight
did not	 form part  of the sale price and was not includible
in the	taxable turnover did not show it in the returns, but
the Assistant  Commissioner of	Sales Tax took the view that
having regard to the provisions of the Cement Control Order,
the amount  of freight formed part of the sale price and was
includible in  the taxable  turnover of	 the assessee and on
this view, he passed two orders of assessment, one under the
Central Sales  Tax Act,	 1956 and the other under the Madhya
Pradesh General Sales Tax Act, 1958, including the amount of
freight in  the taxable turnover of the assessee and levying
tax upon  it and also imposing heavy penalty on the assessee
on the	ground that  the assessee  had failed to disclose in
its returns  the amount	 of freight  as forming	 part of the
taxable turnover.  The same position obtained also in regard
to the	assessment period  15th November, 1971 to 31st July,
1972 and  a similar  order bringing the amount of freight to
tax and imposing heavy penalty on the assessee was passed by
the Assistant  Commissioner of	Sales Tax  under the  Madhya
Pradesh General	 Sales Tax  Act, 1958. Since the question as
to whether  in respect	of transactions	 of sale  of  cement
governed by  the Cement Control Order, the amount of freight
formed part  of the sale price and was liable to be included
in the	taxable turnover of the dealer, was pending decision
in this Court, the assessee
1101
preferred appeals  directly to	this Court  by special leave
against the  Orders of	assessment  made  by  the  Assistant
Commissioner of	 Sales Tax.  The assessee  challenged in the
appeals not  only the  inclusion of the amount of freight in
the  taxable   turnover	 of   the  assessee,  but  also	 the
imposition of  penalty for not showing the amount of freight
as forming part of the taxable turnover in the returns.
     So far  as the  first question  is	 concerned,  namely,
whether the  amount of freight formed part of the sale price
and was	 includible in	the taxable turnover of the assessee
so as  to be exigible to sales tax, it stands concluded by a
recent decision given by this Court in Hindustan Sugar Mills
v. State  of Rajasthan	& Ors.(1)  It has  been held by this
Court in  that case  that by reason of the provisions of the
Cement Control	Order, 1967, which governed the transactions
of sale	 of cement  entered into  by the  assessee with	 the
purchasers, the	 amount of  freight formed  part of the sale
price within the meaning of the first part of the definition
of that	 term contained in sec. 2 (p) of the Rajasthan Sales
Tax Act, 1954 and section 2(h) of the Central Sales Tax Act,
1956 and  was includible  in the  taxable  turnover  of	 the
assessee. The  definition of 'sale price' in section 2(o) of
the Madhya Pradesh General Sales Tax Act, 1958 is materially
in the same terms as section 2(p) of the Rajasthan Sales Tax
Act, 1954,  and this  decision must  therefore equally apply
under the  Madhya Pradesh General Sales Tax Act, 1958 and it
must be	 held that  the amount of freight formed part of the
sale price  within the	meaning of  the first  part  of	 the
definition of  that term  in  section  2(o)  of	 the  Madhya
Pradesh General	 Sales Tax  Act 1958 and section 2(h) of the
Central Sales  Tax Act, 1956 and was rightly included in the
taxable turnover of the assessee.
     We may  point out	that the  observations made  by this
Court in  the Order  dated 31st	 August, 1979  allowing	 the
Review Application  of the assessee in Hindustan Sugar Mills
case (supra)  are equally applicable in the present case and
the State  will do what is fair and just to the appellant as
indicated by this Court in that Order.
     The next  question that  arises  for  consideration  is
whether the Assistant Commissioner of Sales Tax was right in
imposing penalty  on the assessee for not showing the amount
of freight  as forming	part of	 the taxable turnover in its
returns. The  penalty was  imposed under  section 43  of the
Madhya Pradesh	General Sales  Tax Act,	 1958 and  section 9
sub-section (2) of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 on the
1102
ground that  the assessee had furnished false returns by not
including the  amount of  freight in  the  taxable  turnover
disclosed in the returns. Now it is difficult to see how the
assessee could	be said	 to have filed 'false' returns, when
what the  assessee did,	 namely, not including the amount of
freight in  the taxable turnover was under a bonafide belief
that the  amount of  freight did  not form  part of the sale
price and  was not  includible in  the taxable turnover. The
contention of  the assessee  throughout was that on a proper
construction of	 the definition	 of 'sale  price' in section
2(o) of	 the Madhya  Pradesh General Sales Tax Act, 1958 and
section 2(h)  of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956, the amount
of freight  did not  fall within  the definition and was not
liable to  be included in the taxable turnover. This was the
reason why  the assessee  did  not  include  the  amount  of
freight in  the taxable turnover in the returns filed by it.
Now, it	 cannot be said that this was a frivolous contention
taken up merely for the purpose of avoiding liability to pay
tax. It	 was a	highly arguable	 contention  which  required
serious	 consideration	 by  the   Court  and	the   belief
entertained by	the assessee  that   it was  not  liable  to
include the  amount of freight in the taxable turnover could
not be	said to be malafide or unreasonable. What section 43
of the	Madhya Pradesh	General Sales Tax Act, 1958 requires
is that	 the assessee should have filed a 'false' return and
a return  cannot be  said to  be 'false'  unless there is an
element of  deliberateness in  it. It  is possible that even
where the  incorrectness of  the return is claimed to be due
to want	 of care on the part of the assessee and there is no
reasonable explanation	forthcoming from  the  assessee	 for
such want  of care,  the Court	may, in	 a given case, infer
deliberateness and the return may be liable to be branded as
a false	 return. But  where the	 assessee does not include a
particular item	 in the	 taxable turnover  under a  bonafide
belief that  he is not liable so to include it, it would not
be right  to condemn the return as a 'false' return inviting
imposition of  penalty. This view which is being taken by us
is supported  by the  decision of  this Court  in  Hindustan
Steel Limited  v. State	 of Orissa(1) where it has been held
that "even if a minimum penalty is prescribed, the authority
competent  to  impose  the  penalty  will  be  justified  in
refusing to impose penalty, when there is a technical venial
breach of  the provisions  of the  Act or  where the  breach
flows from  a bona  fide belief	 that the  offender  is	 not
liable to  act in the manner prescribed by the statute....."
It is  elementary that	section 43  of	the  Madhya  Pradesh
General Sales  Tax Act,	 1958 providing	 for  imposition  of
penalty is  penal in  character and  unless the filing of an
inaccurate return  is accompanied  by  a  guilty  mind,	 the
section cannot	be invoked for imposing penalty. If the view
canvassed on behalf of the Revenue were accepted, the re-
1103
sult would  be that  even if  the assessee raises a bonafide
contention that	 a particular  item  is	 not  liable  to  be
included in  the taxable  turnover, he would have to show it
as forming  part of  the taxable  turnover in his return and
pay tax	 upon it on pain of being held liable for penalty in
case his  contention is	 ultimately found by the Court to be
not acceptable.	 That surely  could never have been intended
by the Legislature.
     We are,  therefore, of the view that the assessee could
not be	said to	 have filed  'false' returns when it did not
include the  amount of freight in the taxable turnover shown
in the	returns and  the Assistant Commissioner of Sales Tax
was not	 justified in imposing penalty on the assessee under
section 43 of the Madhya Pradesh General Sales Tax, 1958 and
section 9  sub-section (2)  of the  Central Sales  Tax	Act,
1956.
     We accordingly  reject the	 appeals in  so far they are
directed against  the inclusion	 of the amount of freight in
the taxable  turnover of  the assessee but allow the appeals
in so far as they relate to imposition of penalty of freight
in the	taxable turnover  of  the  assessee  but  allow	 the
appeals in  so far  as they  relate to imposition of penalty
and  set   aside  the	Orders	passed	 by  the   Assistant
Commissioner of Sales Tax imposing penalty on the assessee.
     There will be no order as to costs of the appeals.
N. V. K.			     Appeals partly allowed.
1104




