

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Swami Saran Saksena vs State Of U.P on 11 October, 1979Equivalent citations: 1980 AIR  269, 1980 SCR  (1) 923
Author: R Pathak
Bench: Pathak, R.S.
           PETITIONER:
SWAMI SARAN SAKSENA

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF U.P.

DATE OF JUDGMENT11/10/1979

BENCH:
PATHAK, R.S.
BENCH:
PATHAK, R.S.
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.

CITATION:
 1980 AIR  269		  1980 SCR  (1) 923
 1980 SCC  (1)	12
 CITATOR INFO :
 RF	    1982 SC 793	 (5)
 R	    1984 SC 630	 (4)


ACT:
     Compulsory	  Retirement-Temporary	  judicial   officer
allowed to  cross second  Efficiency Bar-Within a few months
compulsorily retired-order-Validity of.



HEADNOTE:
     The services  of the  appellant who  was  appointed  in
November 1954  were terminated	in December  1962,  but	 the
termination order  was withdrawn  on January 16, 1963 and he
rejoined service  and resumed his duties. Again his services
were terminated	 by an	order dated May 18, 1966. This order
having been quashed by the High Court in August 8, 1969, the
appellant was  reinstated with	the benefit of Continuity of
service.
     In June  1973  he	was  allowed  to  cross	 the  second
Efficiency Bar,	 but on	 August 2, 1974 the State Government
made an order compulsorily retiring him from service.
     In the appellant's writ petition, quashing the order of
compulsory retirement,	a single  Judge of  the	 High  Court
declared that  the appellant continued to remain in service.
In allowing  the appeal	 of the State, the Division Bench of
the High  Court rejected the appellant's contention that the
order of compulsory retirement was arbitrary because nothing
to justify the order had taken place after he was allowed to
cross the second Efficiency Bar in June 1973. 11
     Allowing the appeal this Court,
^
     HELD: 1. The compulsory retirement of the appellant was
not called for on the facts of this case. The appellant will
be deemed  to have I continued in service on the date of the
impugned order [925 H-926A]
     2. The appellant was found worthy of being permitted to
cross the  second Efficiency  Bar only	a few months before.
Although this  Court does  not ordinarily interfere with the
decision of  the relevant  authority in	 a case of this kind
particularly when  the order  was made on the recommendation
of the High Court, it is difficult to reconcile the apparent
contradiction that  for the  purpose of	 crossing the second
Efficiency Bar	the appellant  was considered to have worked
with distinct  ability and  with integrity  beyond question,
yet with in a few months thereafter he was found so unfit as
to deserve  compulsory retirement.  There is  no evidence to
show that  suddenly there  was	such  deterioration  in	 the
quality	 of  the  appellant's  work  or	 integrity  that  he
deserved to be compulsorily retired. [925 F-H]



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 1296 of
1978.
     Appeal by	Special Leave  from the	 Judgment and  order
dated 7-5-1976 of the Allahabad High Court in Special Appeal
No. 9/76.
924
     S. S. Saksena (In person)
     G. N. Dikshit and M. V. Goswami for the Respondent.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     PATHAK, J:	 This  appeal  by  special  leave  has	been
preferred  by	the  appellant	against	 the  order  of	 the
Allahabad  High	  Court	  dismissing   his   writ   petition
challenging an order of compulsory retirement.
     The appellant  was appointed by the Government of Uttar
Pradesh in  November, 1954  as a temporary judicial officer.
The State  Government terminated  his services	in December,
1962 but,  on representation  made by  him, the	 termination
order was  withdrawn on	 January  16,  1963.  The  appellant
rejoined service  and resumed  his duties.  However,  by  an
order dated  May 18,  1966,  his  services  were  terminated
again. On a writ petition filed by him in the Allahabad High
Court, the  termination order  was quashed by the High Court
on August  8, 1969.  The appellant  was reinstated  with the
benefit of  continuity of  service. His troubles did not end
there. Although	 he had	 served	 for  about  fifteen  years,
several representation	made by	 him to the State Government
for his	 confirmation met with no response, and he continued
to remain  a temporary	Government  servant.  Meanwhile,  in
June, 1973  he was  allowed to	cross the  second Efficiency
Bar. But  on August  2, 1974  the State	 Government made  an
order compulsorily  retiring the appellant from service. The
order purports	to have	 been made in exercise of the powers
mentioned in  Note I  to Article  465-A of the Civil Service
Regulations, which  provide for	 compulsory retirement	of a
temporary Government  servant on  attaining the	 age  of  SO
years. The appellant had reached the age of 54 years. rt was
recited in  the order  that the	 Governor on being satisfied
that it	 was not  in  the  public  interest  to	 retain	 the
appellant,  who	  was  described  as  a	 temporary  judicial
officer, required  him to retire from service with immediate
effect, with  three months' pay in lieu of notice. The order
was assailed  by the  appellant by  a writ  petition, and  a
learned single	judge of  the High  Court allowed  the	writ
petition on  September 17,  1975 and  quashing the  order he
declared that  the appellant continued to remain in service.
The learned  single judge  held that  the appellant  was not
covered by the terms of Article 465-A and as regards Article
465, which  was invoked in the alternative in support of the
impugned order, he took the view that as the appellant was a
temporary  Government  servant	only  and  not	entitled  to
pension, Article  465 also did not apply. The State of Uttar
Pradesh appealed,  and a  Division Bench  of the  High Court
has, by	 its order  dated May 7, 1976 allowed the appeal and
dismissed the writ petition. The Divi-
925
sion Bench  confirmed that  as the appellant-was a temporary
judicial officer,  Note 1  to Article  465-A  could  not  be
pressed into  service by  the State  Government for retiring
him, but it maintained the order with reference to Note 1 to
Article 465  holding that  the provision  entitled the State
Government to  retire any  Government servant  attaining the
age of	SO years  on three  months' notice  or pay  in	lieu
thereof. lt  observed that the power of the State Government
to  compulsorily   retire  a   Government  servant  was	 not
dependent on his eligibility for pension. It was of the view
that the appellant, although a temporary Government servant,
could be  compulsorily retired	under Note 1 to Article 465.
The further  contention of  the appellant  was also rejected
that the  impugned order  was arbitrary	 inasmuch as  he had
been allowed  to cross	the second  Efficiency Bar  in June,
1973, which could only have been if his work showed distinct
ability and  his integrity  was beyond	doubt and, he urged,
nothing had  taken place  since	 to  justify  the  order  of
compulsory retirement passed shortly thereafter.
     Several contentions  have been raised in this appeal by
the appellant,	who appears  in person. In our judgment, one
of theem  suffices to  dispose of the appeal. The contention
which has  found favour	 with us is that on a perusal of the
material on  the record	 and having regard to the entries in
the personal file and character roll of the appellant, it is
not possible  reasonably to  come to the conclusion that the
compulsory retirement  of the appellant was called for. This
conclusion   follows	inevitably   from   the	  particular
circumstance, among  others, that  the appellant  was  found
worthy of being permitted to cross the second Efficiency Bar
only a	few months  before. Ordinarily,	 the court  does not
interfere with the judgment of the relevant authority on the
point whether  it is  in the public interest to compulsorily
retire a  Government servant.  And we  would have  been even
more reluctant	to reach  the conclusion  we have,  when the
impugned order	of compulsory  retirement was  made  on	 the
recommendation of the High Court itself. But on the material
before	us   we	 are   unable  to   reconcile  the  apparent
contradiction that  although for the purpose of crossing the
second Efficiency  Bar the  appellant was considered to have
worked with  distinct  ability	and  with  integrity  beyond
question yet  within a few months thereafter he was found so
unfit as  to deserve  compulsory retirement.  The entries in
between in  the records	 pertaining to the appellant need to
be examined  and appraised  in that  context.  There  is  no
evidence to  show that suddenly there was such deterioration
in the quality of the appellant's work or integrity that  he
deserved to  be compulsorily retired. For all these reasons,
we are	of opinion  that the  order of compulsory retirement
should be quash-
926
ed. The	 appellant will	 be  deemed  to	 have  continued  in
service on the date of the impugned order.
     The appellant  pressed us	vehemently to  make an order
directing his confirmation and pointed out that after he was
compulsorily  retired  as  many	 as  12	 temporary  judicial
officers were  considered for  confirmation We consider that
it would  not be  right to  make the direction prayed for by
the appellant.	Whether he  should be  confirmed or not is a
matter for the relevant authority. That is a matter to which
the authority  has  yet	 to  apply  its	 mind,	and  in	 the
circumstances it  is not  proper that we should pre-empt its
judgment.
     The appeal	 is allowed  and the order dated May 7, 1976
of the	Division Bench	of the	High Court is set aside. The
order of  the learned  single judge  quashing  the  impugned
order of  the State  Government is  restored. The respondent
will pay the costs of this appeal to the appellant.
N.V.K .					     Appeal allowed.
927




