

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
State Of Punjab vs Labour Court, Jullundur & Ors on 16 October, 1979Equivalent citations: 1979 AIR 1981, 1980 SCR  (1) 953
Author: R Pathak
Bench: Pathak, R.S.
           PETITIONER:
STATE OF PUNJAB

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
LABOUR COURT, JULLUNDUR & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT16/10/1979

BENCH:
PATHAK, R.S.
BENCH:
PATHAK, R.S.
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.

CITATION:
 1979 AIR 1981		  1980 SCR  (1) 953
 1980 SCC  (4)	 4
 CITATOR INFO :
 D	    1981 SC1685	 (8)


ACT:
     Payment of	 Gratuity Act,	1972-S.	 1(3)(b)-Scope	of-A
Government project whether an "Industrial Establishment".
     Retrenched	   workers-If	 entitled    to	   gratuity-
"Retrenchment"-Meaning of.
     Act, a  self-contained Code-Application for gratuity-If
would lie under s. 33 C(2) of Industrial Disputes Act.



HEADNOTE:
     The respondents,  who were	 the employees	of the Hydel
Department of  the Government  of Punjab, were retrenched on
the completion of the work assigned to them. Their claim for
payment of  gratuity under the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972
having been  rejected by  the  appellants,  they  moved	 the
Labour Court  under s.	33-C(2) of  the Industrial  Disputes
Act, 1947.  The Labour	Court allowed  their claim. The High
Court dismissed the appellant's appeal in limine.
     In appeal	it was	contended that	(1) the	 view of the
Labour Court  that the	project was  an establishment within
the meaning  of the definition of "Industrial establishment"
contained in  s. 2(ii)	(g) of	the Payment of Wages Act was
erroneous, and	the Payment of Wages Act being a Central Act
is not	an enactment  contemplated  by	s.  1(3)(b)  of	 the
Payment of  Gratuity Act;  (2)	since  retrenchment  is	 not
superannuation or  retirement or  resignation  or  death  or
disablement due to accident or disease as defined in s. 4(1)
of the	Act, the  retrenched  employees were not entitled to
gratuity; and  (3) the Payment of Gratuity Act being a self-
contained code,	 it excludes  recourse to  any other statute
for claiming  relief under  this  Act  and,  therefore,	 the
respondents application	 under s.  33-C(2) of the Industrial
Disputes Act was misconceived.
     Allowing the appeal in part;
^
     HELD :  1(a). It  is not  correct to  say that  what is
contemplated by s. 1(3)(b) of the Payment of Gratuity Act is
a law enacted by the State Legislature and not a Central Act
like the  Payment of  Wages Act.  There can be no doubt that
when s.	 1(3)(b) speaks	 of "any  law for  the time being in
force in relation to shops and establishments in a State" it
includes the  Payment of  Wages Act, which is a law in force
in the State. [956 B-C]
     (b) The  Payment of Wages Act is a statute which, while
it  may	  not  relate  to  shops.  relates  to	a  class  of
establishments, i.e.  industrial establishments. There is no
warrant for limiting the meaning of the expression "law"  in
s. 1(3)(b)  to	a  law	which  relates	to  both  shops	 and
establishments such  as	 the  Punjab  Shops  and  Commercial
Establishments Act, 1958. The expression is comprehensive in
its scope  and can  mean a  law in relation to shops as well
as, separately, a law in relation to establishments or a law
in relation to shops
954
and commercial	establishments and a law in relation to non-
commercial establishments.  Had the  intention of Parliament
been to refer to a law relating to commercial establishments
it would  not  have  left  the	expression  "establishments"
unqualified. There is no reason for giving a limited meaning
to s.  1(3) (b). This section applies to every establishment
within the meaning of any law for the time being in force in
relation to establishments in a State. Such an establishment
would include an industrial establishment within the meaning
of s.  2(ii)(g) of  the Payment of Wages Act. Therefore, the
Payment of Gratuity Act applies to an establishment in which
any  work   relating,  among   others,	to  the	 generation,
transmission and  distribution of  electricity or  any other
form of	 power is  being carried on as defined in s. 1(3)(b)
of the Act. [956 D-H, 957 A]
     2. The expression "retrenchment" which has been defined
in s.  2(q) to	mean  "termination  of	the  service  of  an
employee otherwise  than on superannuation" is framed in the
widest terms.  Except for superannuation, any termination of
service would amount to "retirement" for the purposes of the
Act.  Retrenchment   is	 termination   of  service.   It  is
immaterial that the termination is occasioned by the need to
discharge surplus labour. [957 E-F]
     Bersi Light  Railway Company  Labour v. K. M. Joglekar,
AIR 1957 SC 121, referred to.
     3(a). Parliament  intended that proceedings for payment
of gratuity  due under	the Act must be taken under that Act
and  not  under	 any  other.  There  fore  the	respondents'
application did	 not lie  under s. 33-C(2) of the Industrial
Disputes Act.  and the	Labor Court  had no  jurisdiction to
entertain it. [959-E]
     (b). The  Payment of  Gratuity Act	 is a  complete code
containing derailed  provisions covering  all the  essential
features of  the scheme	 for payment  of gratuity.  For	 the
enforcement of	its provisions,	 the Act  provides  for	 the
appointment of a Controlling Authority for administering the
Act. He has been invested with an amplitude of power for the
full discharge	of his	responsibilities under	the Act. Any
error committed	 by him	 can be	 corrected in  appeal by the
appropriate   Government    or	 an    appellate   authority
particularly constituted under the Act. [959 B-D]



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION :  Civil Appeal  No. 8 of
1977.
     Appeal by	Special Leave  from the	 Judgment and  Order
dated 5-6-1975 of the Punjab and Haryana High Court in Civil
Writ No. 3166/75.
     Soli J. Sorabji, Solicitor General and O. P. Sharma for
the Appellant.
     Hardev Singh for the Respondent.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     PATHAK J.-In  this appeal by special leave the State of
Punjab appeals	against the  judgment and  order of the High
Court of  Punjab &  Haryana refusing to quash an order under
section 33-C(2) of the
955
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 for payment of gratuity to the
respondents under the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972.
     The Hydel	Department of  the Government  of Punjab had
undertaken a Project described as the "Hydel Upper Bari Doab
Construction Project."	The respondents	 Nos. 2	 to  8	were
employed as workcharged employees. On completion of the work
assigned to  them they	were  retrenched,  and	retrenchment
compensation was  paid to  them.  The  employee	 respondents
claimed that  they were also entitled to gratuity, bonus and
certain other  allowances and  benefits.  The  gratuity	 was
claimed under  the Payment  of Gratuity Act, 1972. The claim
being disputed,	 the respondents  applied under	 section 33-
C(2) of	 the Industrial	 Disputes Act,	1947 to	 the  Labour
Court, Jullundur. The Labour Court made an order dated April
30, 1975  that the employee respondents were entitled to the
gratuity claimed  by them  but not  to bonus  and the  other
allowances and	benefits.  A  writ  petition  filed  by	 the
appellant has  been dismissed in limine by the High Court of
Punjab and Haryana.
     In	 this  appeal,	the  learned  Additional  Solicitor-
General contends on behalf of the appellant that the Payment
of Gratuity  Act, 1972	cannot be invoked by the respondents
because the  Project does  not	fall  within  the  scope  of
Section 1(3) of that Act. Section 1(3) provides that the Act
will apply to :
     "(a) every factory,  mine, oilfield,  plantation,	port
	  and railway company;
     (b)  every shop  or establishment within the meaning of
	  any law for the time being in force in relation to
	  shops and  establishments in a State, in which ten
	  or more persons are employed, or were employed, on
	  any day of the preceding twelve months;
     (c)  such	 other	  establishments   or	 class	  of
	  establishments, in which ten or more employees are
	  employed, or	were employed,	on any	day  of	 the
	  preceding twelve months, as the Central Government
	  may, by notification, specify in this behalf."
According to the parties, it is clause (b) alone which needs
to be considered for deciding whether the Act applies to the
Project. The  Labour Court  has held  that the Project is an
establishment within  the meaning  of the  Payment of  Wages
Act, section  2(ii) (g)	 of  which  defines  an	 "industrial
establishment" to  mean an  "establishment in which any work
relating to the construction, development or maintenance of
956
buildings,  roads,   bridges  or   canals,  or	relating  to
operations connected  with  navigation,	 irrigation  or	 the
supply of water, or relating to the generation, transmission
and distribution  of electricity  or any other form of power
is   being carried  on." It  is urged for the appellant that
the Payment of Wages Act is not an enactment contemplated by
section 1(3)(b)	 of the Payment of Gratuity Act. The Payment
of Wages  Act, it is pointed out, is a central enactment and
section 1(3)(b),  it is said, refers to a law enacted by the
State Legislature.  We are  unable to accept the contention.
Section 1(3)  (b) speaks  of "any  law for the time being in
force in  relation to  shops and establishments in a State."
There can  be no dispute that the Payment of Wages Act is in
force in  the State  of Punjab.	 Then, it  is submitted, the
Payment of  Wages Act is not a law in relation to "shops and
establishments". As  to that,  the Payment of Wages Act is a
statute which,	while it may not relate to shops, relates to
a class	 of  establishments,  that  is	to  say,  industrial
establishments. But,  it is  contended, the  law referred to
under section  1(3) (b) must be a law which relates  to both
shops  and  establishments,  such  as  the  Punjab  Shops  &
Commercial Establishments  Act, 1958.  It  is  difficult  to
accept that  contention because	 there is  no warrant for so
limiting the  meaning of  the expression   "law"  in section
1(3) (b).  The expression is comprehensive in its scope, and
can mean  a law in relation to shops as well as, separately,
a law in relation to establishments, or a law in relation to
shops and commercial establishments and a law in relation to
noncommercial establishments.  Had section  1(3)(b) intended
to refer  to a	single enactment, surely the appellant would
have been able to point to such a statute, that is to say, a
statute	 relating   to	shops	and   establishments,	both
commercial  and	  non-commercial.   The	  Punjab   Shops   &
Commercial Establishments  Act does  not relate to all kinds
of establishments.  Besides shops,  it relates to commercial
establishments alone.  Had the intention of Parliament been,
when enacting section 1(3)(b), to refer to a law relating to
commercial  establishments,  it	 would	not  have  left	 the
expression "establishments"  unqualified. We  have carefully
examined the  various provisions  of the Payment of Gratuity
Act, and  we are unable to discern any reason for giving the
limited meaning	 to section  1(3) (b)  urged  before  us  on
behalf of  the appellant.  Section 1(3) (b) applies to every
establishment within  the meaning  of any  law for  the time
being in  force in  relation to	 establishments in  a State.
Such  an   establishment   would   include   an	  industrial
establishment within the meaning of section 2(ii) (g) of the
Payment of  Wages Act.	Accordingly, we	 are of opinion that
the Payment  of Gratuity  Act applies to an establishment in
which any  work relating  to  construction,  development  or
maintenance of buildings,
957
roads,	bridges	  or  canals,	or  relating  to  operations
connected with	navigation,  irrigation	 or  the  supply  of
water, or  relating  to	 the  generation,  transmission	 and
distribution of	 electricity or	 any other  form of power is
being carried  on. The	Hydel Upper  Bari Doab	Construction
Project	 is  such  an  establishment,  and  the	 Payment  of
Gratuity Act applies to it.
     The second	 contention on	behalf of  the appellant  is
that retrenchment  does not  fall within section 4(1) of the
Payment of  Gratuity Act, under which gratuity is payable to
an employee  on	 the  termination  of  his  employment.	 The
termination envisaged occurs either
     "(a) on his superannuation, or
     (b)  on his retirement or resignation, or
     (c)  on his  death or  disablement due  to accident  or
	  disease."
     Having regard  to the definition of "superannuation" in
section 2(r)  of the  Act, it  is clear that the case is not
one under  clause (a).	Nor, admittedly,  is it a case which
falls under  clause (c).  As regards clause (b), it is not a
case of	 resignation. The only question is whether it can be
regarded under	clause (b)  as a  case	of  retirement.	 The
expression "retirement"	 has been defined by section 2(q) to
mean "termination  of the  service of  an employee otherwise
than on	 superannuation." The  definition is  framed in	 the
widest terms.  Except for superannuation, any termination of
service would amount to "retirement" for the purposes of the
Act.  Retrenchment  is	a  termination	of  service.  It  is
immaterial that the termination is occasioned by the need to
discharge surplus  labour.  That  retrenchment	implies	 the
discharge of  surplus labour  was explained  in Bersi  Light
Railway Company	 Labour v.  K. M.  Joglekar. Nonetheless, it
amounts to  termination of  service. We	 are of opinion that
the retrenchment  of the  employee respondents	falls within
the scope  of section  4(1) of	the Payment of Gratuity Act,
and the	 employee  respondents	are  therefore	entitled  to
gratuity under that provision.
     The third	contention raised  by the  appellant is that
the employee  respondents were	not entitled  to apply under
section 33-C(2)	 of the	 Industrial Disputes  Act, 1947	 for
payment of the gratuity, and should have, if at all, applied
under the  provisions of  the Payment of Gratuity Act. It is
urged that  the Payment	 of Gratuity Act is a self-contained
code incorporating  all the essential provisions relating to
payment of gratuity which can be claimed under that Act, and
its provisions	impliedly  exclude  recourse  to  any  other
statute for that purpose. The
958
contention has force and must be accepted. A careful perusal
of the	relevant provisions  of the  Payment of Gratuity Act
shows that  Parliament has  enacted a  closely	knit  scheme
providing for  payment of  gratuity. A controlling authority
is appointed  by the appropriate Government under section 3.
and  Parliament	  has	made   him   responsible   for	 the
administration of  the entire  Act. In	what event  gratuity
will become  payable and  how  it  will	 be  quantified	 are
detailed in  section  4.  Section  7(1)	 entitled  a  person
eligible for  payment of gratuity to apply in that behalf to
the employer.  Under section  7(2), the employer is obliged,
as  soon   as  gratuity	  becomes  payable  and	 whether  an
application  has  or  has  not	been  made  for	 payment  of
gratuity, to determine the amount of gratuity and inform the
person to whom the gratuity is payable specifying the amount
of gratuity  so determined.  He is obliged, by virtue of the
same provision,	 to inform  the controlling  authority also,
thus ensuring  that the	 controlling authority	is seized at
all times of information in regard to gratuity as it becomes
payable. If  a dispute	is raised in regard to the amount of
gratuity payable  or as to the admissibility of any claim to
gratuity, or  as to  the  person  entitled  to	receive	 the
gratuity, section  7(4) (a) requires the employer to deposit
with the  controlling authority	 such amount as he admits to
be payable  by him as gratuity. The controlling authority is
empowered.  under   section  7(4)(b),	to  enter   upon  an
adjudication of	 the dispute,  and after  due  inquiry,	 and
after  giving  the  parties  to	 the  dispute  a  reasonable
opportunity of	being heard, he is required to determine the
amount of  gratuity payable. In this regard, the controlling
authority has  all the powers as are vested in a court while
trying a  suit under  the Code	of Civil  Procedure, 1908 in
respect of  obtaining evidentiary material and the recording
of evidence.  The amount  deposited by the employer with the
controlling authority  as the  admitted amount	of  gratuity
will be	 paid over  by	the  controlling  authority  to	 the
employee or  his nominee  or heir.  Section 7(7) provides an
appeal against	the order of the controlling authority under
section 7(4)  to the  appropriate Government  or such  other
authority as  may be specified by the appropriate Government
in that	 behalf. The appropriate Government or the appellate
authority is  empowered under section 7(8), after giving the
parties to  the appeal	a reasonable  opportunity  of  being
heard, to  confirm, modify  or reverse	the decision  of the
controlling authority.	Where the amount of gratuity payable
is not	paid   by the  employer with in the prescribed time,
the controlling	 authority is  required	 by  section  8,  on
application made  to it	 by the aggrieved person, to issue a
certificate for that amount to the Collector. The Collector,
thereupon, is  empowered to  recover the amount of gratuity,
together with  compound interest thereon at the rate of nine
per cent per annum from the date
959
of expiry  of  the  prescribed	time,  as  arrears  of	land
revenue, and pay the same to the person entitled thereto.
     It is  apparent that the Payment of Gratuity Act enacts
a complete  code containing detailed provisions covering all
the essential  features of a scheme for payment of gratuity.
It creates  the right to payment of gratuity, indicates when
the right  will accrue,	 and lays  down the  principles	 for
quantification of  the gratuity.  It  provides	further	 for
recovery of  the amount,  and contains an especial provision
that compound  interest at  nine per  cent per annum will be
payable on  delayed payment.  For  the	enforcement  of	 its
provisions, the	 Act  provides	for  the  appointment  of  a
controlling authority,	who is	entrusted with	the task  of
administering the  Act. The  fulfilment of  the	 rights	 and
obligations of	the parties are made his responsibility, and
he has been invested with an amplitude of power for the full
discharge of that responsibility. Any error committed by him
can be	corrected in appeal by the appropriate Government or
an appellate  authority particularly  constituted under	 the
Act.
     Upon  all	 these	considerations,	 the  conclusion  is
inescapable that   Parliament  intended that proceedings for
payment of  gratuity due  under the  Payment of Gratuity Act
must be	 taken under  that Act and not under any other. That
being so, it must be held that the applications filed by the
employee respondents under section 33-C(2) of the Industrial
Disputes Act  did not  lie, and	 the  Labour  Court  had  no
jurisdiction to	 entertain and	dispose	 of  them.  On	that
ground, this appeal must succeed.
     In the circumstances, it is not necessary to notice the
further submission  on behalf  of the appellant that where a
serious dispute exists in regard to the basis of a claim for
payment of  gratuity, no  proceedings will lie under section
33-C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
     The appeal	 is allowed,  and the  order dated April 30,
1975 of	 the Labour  Court,  Jullundur	is  quashed.  Having
regard to  the terms  on which	special leave was granted by
this Court  to the appellant, the appellant shall pay to the
employee respondents their costs of this appeal.
     At this  stage we put to the learned Solicitor-General,
who  appeared	for  the   State  whether   in	the  special
circumstances it was not fair that the entire amount be paid
by the appellant to the employees without
960
driving them  to a separate proceeding. He has fairly stated
that the  appellant is	willing to do so and the sole object
of this	 litigation was	 to  have  the	law  clarified.	 We,
therefore, direct  the appellant  to  pay  to  the  employee
respondents within one month from today the amounts that may
be due to them, if they have not already been paid.
P.B.R.	  Appeal allowed
961

