

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Major R. S. Murgai (Retd.) vs Major P. N. Kaushik (Retd.) & Ors on 12 October, 1979Equivalent citations: 1980 AIR  107, 1980 SCR  (1) 936
Author: S M Fazalali
Bench: Fazalali, Syed Murtaza
           PETITIONER:
MAJOR R. S. MURGAI (RETD.)

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
MAJOR P. N. KAUSHIK (RETD.) & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT12/10/1979

BENCH:
FAZALALI, SYED MURTAZA
BENCH:
FAZALALI, SYED MURTAZA
SEN, A.P. (J)

CITATION:
 1980 AIR  107		  1980 SCR  (1) 936
 1980 SCC  (1)	10


ACT:
     Contempt of  Court	 Act,  s.  2(c)-Written	 submissions
filed by  one of  the parties  pursuant to the directions of
the court  after  the  Judgment	 was  reserved.	 If  private
communication tending  to interfere  with the  due course of
justice.



HEADNOTE:
     When one  of the  parties to  a case  pursuant  to	 the
directions of the court, makes written submissions after the
Judgment was  reserved, such  submissions cannot  be  called
private communication  to the  Judge. They cannot be said to
have prejudiced, interfered with or tended to interfere with
the due	 course of justice within the meaning of s. 2(c)(ii)
of the	Contempt of Court Act. These submissions formed part
of the record. [937 B-D]
     In the  instant case  in his  counter  affidavit  filed
after the  Judgment was	 reserved the respondent stated that
he was	filing the  statements pursuant to the directions of
the Company Judge. The High Court was justified in declining
to issue a notice for contempt against the respondents. [937
A-E]



JUDGMENT:
     CRIMINAL APPELLATE	 JURISDICTION: Criminal	 Appeal	 No.
427 of 1978.
     From the  Judgment and  Order dated  17-10-1978 of	 the
Delhi High Court in Criminal Contempt Petition No. 7/78.
     Appellant in person.
     K.N. Bhat for Respondent No. 1
     R.P.  Bhatt,   R.B.  Datar	  and  Girish	Chandra	 for
Respondent 2.
     P.G. Gokhale,  B.R. Aggarwal,  Jenendra  Lal  and	M.S.
Diwan for Respondent No. 3.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     FAZAL ALI, J. This is an appeal against an order passed
by the	Delhi  High  Court  refusing  to  initiate  contempt
proceedings against  the  respondents.	It  appears  that  a
contempt matter	 was pending  before a	Single Judge,  Delhi
High Court  which was  heard at	 length and the judgment was
reserved  on  the  9th	December,  1977.  The  judgment	 was
actually delivered  on 28-4-1978  and in  between these	 two
dates  certain	 written  submissions	were  made   by	 the
respondents to	the Court  which the  appellant describes in
his petition as private communications
937
to the Company Judge. The respondent P.N. Kaushik in para 36
of the counter-affidavit has made a specific allegation that
at the	time of reserving the judgment the Company Judge had
directed the  parties to  submit their	written	 submissions
regarding  the	points	at  issue  before  the	judgment  is
delivered. The	submissions in	question were  submitted  on
various dates  i.e. 12-12-77  by Major	Kaushik, 23-1-78 and
15-2-78 by  the Director-General  of Resettlement.  As these
submissions were  made in  pursuance of	 the  order  of	 the
Court, they  cannot be	held to be private communications to
the Company  Judge in  order to	 decide the  case. As  these
documents were	filed before  the Court under the directions
of the	Court itself,  it cannot  be said  by an  stretch of
imagination that  these documents  prejudiced, interfered or
tended to  interfere with  the due  course of justice within
the meaning  of Section	 2(c) (ii)  and therefore, would not
constitute criminal  contempt within  the meaning of section
2(c) of	 the Contempt  of Court	 Act. These submissions form
part of	 the record  and, therefore, there is no question of
their  being  regarded	as  private  communications  from  a
litigant to  a Judge.  On the contrary, the Director-General
of Resettlement	 was appointed	as the	administrator by the
Court itself  and being	 an officer  of the court, he was at
liberty to  make submissions  to the court in respect of the
case  in  question.  The  High	Court  therefore  was  fully
justified in  declining to  issue any  notice  for  contempt
against the  respondents on  the submissions  filed  by	 the
appellant.  We	 would	refrain	  from	making	any  comment
regarding the  merits of  the appeal which the appellant has
filed before  the Division  Bench against  the order  of the
Company Judge dated 28th April, 1978, which we understand is
pending hearing	 before the Division Bench. The appeal filed
by the	appellant in  this Court is totally misconceived and
is rejected.
     In the  circumstances of this case, we make no order as
to costs.
P.B.R.	  Appeal dismissed.
938
