

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Abdul Qadir vs Managing Officer Cum Asstt. ... on 22 October, 1979Equivalent citations: 1980 AIR   89, 1980 SCR  (1) 993
Author: N Untwalia
Bench: Untwalia, N.L.
           PETITIONER:
ABDUL QADIR

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
MANAGING OFFICER CUM ASSTT. CUSTODIAN OF EVACUEE PROPERTY,JA

DATE OF JUDGMENT22/10/1979

BENCH:
UNTWALIA, N.L.
BENCH:
UNTWALIA, N.L.
KOSHAL, A.D.

CITATION:
 1980 AIR   89		  1980 SCR  (1) 993
 1980 SCC  (1) 146


ACT:
     Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act
1954-S-20A(1) Explanation-Scope of.



HEADNOTE:
     The appellant purchased a house in July, 1948. Although
neither the  vendor nor	 the appellant was an evacuee within
the meaning  of the  Administration of Evacuee Property Act,
1950, the  appellant was treated as an evacuee and the house
was declared  evacuee property	in 1951.  In response to the
appellant's  petition  filed  in  1953,	 a  certificate	 was
granted by  the Government under the unamended provisions of
section	 16  of	 the  Act.  When  the  appellant  asked	 for
restoration of	the house  the Assistant Custodian passed an
order in  1957 granting	 restoration. In  the meantime since
respondent No.	2 had been inducted as a tenant in the house
by the	Custodian after it was declared evacuee property the
appellant was asked to take symbolic possession of the house
allowing the tenant to continue in possession.
     Section 20A(1)  of the  Displaced Persons (Compensation
and Rehabilitation) Act, 1954 provided that where an evacuee
had made  an application  under section	 16 of	the  Evacuee
Property Act,  1950 and the Central Government is of opinion
that it is not expedient or practicable to restore the whole
or any	part of	 the property  to the applicant, it shall be
lawful for  the Central	 Government to	pay to the applicant
the value of the property in cash from the compensation pool
in lieu	 of the	 evacuee property.  The Explanation  to this
section provided  that the  provisions of  this	 sub-section
shall  apply,	whether	 or   not  a   certificate  for	 the
restoration of	the evacuee  property had been issued to the
applicant under section 16(1) of the 1950 Act.
     The Central  Government revised its earlier order dated
November 11,  1960 and	gave compensation  to the  appellant
under section 20A of the 1954 Act.
     The appellant's  writ petition challenging the order of
the Assistant Custodian was dismissed by the High Court.
     Dismissing the appeal,
^
     HELD: 1. According to section 16 of the 1950 Act, as it
stood  before	October	 22,   1956,  an   application	 for
certificate was to be made to the Central Government. On the
issuance of  the certificate,  restoration order-was made by
the Custodian  of Evacuee  Property. In the instant case the
certificate was	 issued on  October 27, 1956. The High Court
was therefore  right in	 holding that the certificate issued
in accordance with the old law was not valid. [995 D-F]
     2. The  provisions of section 20A(1) have got the over-
riding effect  by virtue  of the  Explanation appended to it
even after a certificate for the restora-
994
tion  of  the  evacuee	property  had  been  issued  to	 the
applicant on  October 27,  1956. In spite of the certificate
it  was	  open	to  the	 Central  Government  not  to  allow
restoration of	the house  to the  appellant and  to pay him
compensation only.  The Central	 Government has	 adopted the
latter course.	Respondent No.	2, a  displaced person,	 was
inducted as  a tenant  in the property a long time back. The
property was  sold to  him  by	the  Custodian.	 In  such  a
situation it  was just	and proper  to refuse restoration of
the  property	to  the	  appellant  and  to  pay  him	only
compensation. [996 F-H]



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 2233 of
1969.
     From the  Judgment and  Order dated  11-3-1968  of	 the
Rajasthan High Court in Writ Petition No. 126/62.
     Sobhagmal Jain and S. K. Jain for the Appellant.
     E. C. Agarwala and Girish Chandra for the Respondent.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     UNTWALIA, J.  This is  an appeal by certificate by Shri
Abdul Qadir  from the  judgment of  the Rajasthan High Court
dismissing his Writ Petition. The house in question belonged
to one Mohammed Amin Khan. The appellant purchased the house
from the  said owner on 10-7-1948 for Rs. 12,000. It appears
that neither  the appellant  nor Mohammed  Amin Khan  was an
evacuee within	the meaning of the Administration of Evacuee
Property Act,  1950, hereinafter called the Evacuee Property
Act. But  under some  mistaken notion probably the appellant
was treated  as an  evacuee and the house was declared as an
evacuee	 property  on  15-11-1951  in  accordance  with	 the
Evacuee Property  Act. After  such declaration	the question
that the  property was	an evacuee  property  could  not  be
reopened and  became final.  Upon that footing the appellant
filed an application on 26-9-1953 under section 16(1) of the
Evacuee Property  Act, as  the section then stood, for grant
of a  certificate.  On	27-10-1956  the	 Central  Government
granted a  certificate under  the unamended provision of law
contained in section 16. Pursuant to the above the appellant
made an	 application to	 the Assistant	Custodian of Evacuee
Property for  restoration of the house under sub-section (2)
of section 16. The Asstt. Custodian, respondent no. 1 passed
an order  on 18-3-1957 restoring the house to the appellant.
But before  that Shri  Ajjumal, respondent  no. 2  had	been
inducted as  a tenant in the house by the Custodian after it
was declared  as an  evacuee  property.	 The  appellant	 was
directed to  take symbolic  possession of the house allowing
the said  tenant to continue in its occupation on receipt of
rent from him.
     The appellant came to know later that on 11-11-1960 the
Central Government  passed an order under section 20A of the
Displaced Persons  (Compensation  and  Rehabilitation)	Act,
1954, hereinafter
995
referred to  as the  Displaced Persons	Act, whereby  it was
ordered that  in respect  of the house in question action be
taken in accordance with the said provision of law. On 6-12-
1960 the  Central Government ordered that it had revised its
order dated  11-11-1960 and  the petitioner  was entitled to
compensation only under section 20A of the Displaced Persons
Act. In	 the Civil  Suit  filed	 by  the  appellant  against
Ajjumal it  transpired that a sale deed had been executed in
his favour as he was a displaced person in occupation of the
house and  the appellant  was entitled to compensation only.
He, therefore,	filed a	 writ petition	in the High Court to
challenge the  action of the Assistant Custodian, respondent
no. 2 and the Union of India, respondent no. 3.
     The writ  case was contested by all the respondents and
it was asserted that Ajjumal being a sitting allottee had to
be  rehabilitated   and	 the   appellant  was	entitled  to
compensation only.
     The High Court has quoted s. 16 of the Evacuee Property
Act as	it stood  prior to  22-18-1956 and the section as it
came into  force after that date. It has rightly pointed out
that there  was a change of procedure in the two provisions.
According to  section 16  as it	 stood before 22-10-1956 the
application for	 certificate was  to be	 made to the Central
Government and	the Central Government in its discretion was
to  issue  the	certificate.  On  the  issuance	 of  such  a
certificate   after    following   certain   procedure	 the
restoration order  had to  be made  by the  Custodian of the
Evacuee Property. In the present case only a certificate was
issued on  27-10-1956. The  High Court	is right  in holding
that the  certificate so  issued in  accordance with the old
law was	 not valid. Attempts were made before the High Court
to show	 that the said certificate was issued pursuant to an
order alleged to have been made on 1-10.1956. The High Court
was not	 satisfied about  the correctness of this new stand.
Nothing could  be pointed out to us to persuade us to take a
view different	from the  one taken  by the  High  Court  in
regard to  the question of the invalidity of the certificate
issued in favour of the appellant on 27-10-1956.
     There is another difficulty in the way of the appellant
and that  comes in because of the provision of law contained
in section  20A of  the	 Displaced  Persons  Act.  The	said
section also had undergone a change from time to time and at
the relevant  time sub-section	(1) of	section 20A stood as
follows:-
	  (1) Where  any evacuee  or his  heir has  made  an
     application under	Sec. 16	 of the Evacuee Property Act
     and the Central Government is of opinion that it is not
     expedient or
996
     practicable to  restore the  whole or  any part of such
     property to  the applicant by reason of the property or
     part thereof  being in occupation of a displaced person
     or otherwise,  then, notwithstanding anything contained
     in the  Evacuee Property  Act and this Act, it shall be
     lawful for the Central Government-
     (a)  to transfer  to  the	applicant  in  lieu  of	 the
	  evacuee  property   or  any	part  thereof,	 any
	  immovable property in the compensation pool or any
	  part thereof,	 being in the opinion of the Central
	  Government as	 nearly as  may be of the same value
	  as the  evacuee property  or, as  the case may be,
	  any part thereof, or
     (b)  to pay  to the  applicant amount  in cash from the
	  compensation-pool in	lieu of the evacuee property
	  or part  thereof as  the Central Government having
	  regard to  the value	of the	evacuee property  or
	  part thereof may, in the circumstances deem fit.
     Explanation:- The	provisions of this sub-section shall
     apply,  whether   or  not,	  a  certificate   for	 the
     restoration of  the evacuee property has been issued to
     the applicant  under sub-sec.  (1) of  sec. 16  of	 the
     Evacuee  Property	 Act,  as   in	force	before	 the
     commencement of  the Administration of Evacuee Property
     (Amendment) Ordinance,  1956, if  the evacuee  property
     has not in fact been restored to the applicant."
It would  be noticed  that the provisions of section 20A (1)
have got the over-riding effect by virtue of the Explanation
appended to  it even after a certificate for the restoration
of the	evacuee property had been issued to the applicant on
27-10-1956. In	spite of  the certificate it was open to the
Central Government  not to allow restoration of the house to
the appellant  and to pay him compensation only. The Central
Government has	adopted the latter course. Respondent No. 2,
a displaced person, was inducted as a tenant in the property
long time  back. The  property was  sold to  him also by the
Custodian. In  such a  situation it  was just  and proper to
refuse restoration  of the  property to the appellant and to
pay him	 compensation only.  But we  were informed  that the
amount of  compensation payable	 to the	 appellant has	been
determined  at	 a  somewhat   low  figure   being  in	 the
neighborhood of Rs. 8,000 only. The appellant had
997
purchased the house for Rs. 12,000 in the year 1948. In that
view of	 the matter  we recommend  for consideration  of the
Government whether  it would be possible for them to enhance
the amount  of compensation  at least  to the  figure of Rs.
12,000. The  matter is finally within their jurisdiction and
they may decide it as they think it fit and proper to do.
     For the  reasons stated  above this appeal fails and is
dismissed but without costs.
P.B.R.					   Appeal dismissed.
998




