

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Vasant Narayan Pawar vs State Of Maharashtra on 19 December, 1979Equivalent citations: 1980 AIR 1270, 1980 SCR  (2)1209
Author: V Krishnaiyer
Bench: Krishnaiyer, V.R.
           PETITIONER:
VASANT NARAYAN PAWAR

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF MAHARASHTRA

DATE OF JUDGMENT19/12/1979

BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
PATHAK, R.S.

CITATION:
 1980 AIR 1270		  1980 SCR  (2)1209


ACT:
     Dying declaration-Relevancy-Even  though  the  deceased
has been  set fire  to her husband, while making a statement
she pleads  that her  husbands should  not be beaten-Whether
such a	request could  be converted  into one exculpative of
the accused-Section 32 of the Evidence Act.



HEADNOTE:
     Dismissing the special leave petition, the Court
^
     HELD: The	statement by the dying tragic woman that her
husband should	not be	beaten, even  though she  was  dying
having been  burnt, cannot be converted into one exculpative
of the	accused. This  is a sentiment too touching for tears
and stems  from the  values of	the culture  of	 the  Indian
womanhood. [1210A-B]
Observation:
     Police  sensitisation  mechanisms	which  will  prevent
commission of  crimes like  wife burning  must be  set up if
these horrendous crimes are to be avoided. Likewise, special
provisions facilitating	 easier proof  of such special class
of murders  on establishing  certain  basic  facts  must  be
provided for  by appropriate  legislation. Law	must rise to
the  challenge	of  shocking  criminology,  especially	when
helpless women are the victims and the crime is committed in
the secrecy of the husband's home. [1210C-E]



JUDGMENT:
     CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Special Leave Petition
(Criminal) No. 2636 of 1979.
     From the  Judgment and  Order dated  25-4-1979  of	 the
Bombay High Court in Criminal Appeal No. 822/77.
     Pramod Swarup (Amicus Curiae) for the Petitioner.
     H. R. Khanna and M. N. Shroff for the Respondent.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     KRISHNA IYER, J.-Shri Pramod Swarup appearing as amicus
curiae has  presented the case of the accused as effectively
as the	record permits. Indeed, he has gone to the extent of
pressing into  service points  which do	 not appear to us to
have any  force. Moreover,  he has  tried to  persuade us to
believe that  a dying  declaration made	 by the lady who was
burnt to  death by the husband-accused-that is the charge on
which the  trial court	and the	 High Court  have found	 the
petitioner guilty-is  exonerative of the accused-husband and
does not  implicate him	 as the	 Court	has  construed.	 The
declarant as she was dying was
1210
conscious enough  to make  a statement	and in	one  of	 the
several statements  she made, it would appear, she said when
her husband  was being	beaten up  that even  though she had
been burnt,  her husband  should not  be beaten.  This is  a
sentiment too  touching for  tears and stems from the values
of the	culture of the Indian womanhood. A wife when she has
been set fire to by her husband, true to her tradition, does
not want  her husband  to be  assaulted brutally. It is this
sentiment which prompted this dying tragic woman to say that
even if	 she was dying having been burnt, her husband should
not  be	 beaten.  We  are  unable  to  appreciate  how	this
statement can  be converted  into  one	exculpative  of	 the
accused. Anyway,  we are mentioning these facts only because
Shri  Pramod   Swarup  contended   that	 they  were  weighty
circumstances sufficient to cancel the conviction.
     Wife burning  tragedies are  becoming too	frequent for
the  country   to  be	complacent.   Police   sensitisation
mechanisms which  will prevent the commission of such crimes
must be set up if these horrendous crimes are to be avoided.
Likewise, special  provisions facilitating  easier proof  of
such special  class of murders on establishing certain basic
facts must  be provided	 for by appropriate legislation. Law
must  rise   to	 the   challenge  of  shocking	criminology,
especially when helpless women are the victims and the crime
is committed  in the  secrecy of the husband's home. We hope
the State's concern for the weaker sections of the community
will be	 activised into appropriate machinery and procedure.
We dismiss the special leave petition.
S.R.					 Petition dismissed.

1




