

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Nimeon Sangma & Ors vs Home Secretary, Govt. Of ... on 30 April, 1979Equivalent citations: 1979 AIR 1518, 1979 SCR  (3) 785
Author: V Krishnaiyer
Bench: Krishnaiyer, V.R.
           PETITIONER:
NIMEON SANGMA & ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
HOME SECRETARY, GOVT. OF MEGHALAYA & ORS

DATE OF JUDGMENT30/04/1979

BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
PATHAK, R.S.
KOSHAL, A.D.

CITATION:
 1979 AIR 1518		  1979 SCR  (3) 785
 1979 SCC  (1) 700


ACT:
     Administration    of    Justice-Pre-trial	  detention-
Expeditious disposal  of cases	including investigations and
trials-Sections 167,  209 &  309 of Criminal Procedure Code,
1973.



HEADNOTE:
     In their  petition for  the issue	of a  writ of habeas
corpus, the petitioners alleged illegal detention of a large
number of persons under guise of the judicial process.
^
     HELD :  1. Criminal Justice breaks down at a point when
expeditious  trial  is	not  attempted	while  the  affected
parties are languishing in jail. The Criminal Procedure Code
in Sections  167, 209  and 309 has emphasised the importance
of expeditious	disposal of  cases including  investigations
and trials. [786E]
     2. The  State Government to take a policy decision with
a view	to ensure  that accused persons, too indigent to set
in motion  the judicial process, do not suffer incarceration
silently. [787B]
     3. The  Government will  do well  to  comply  with	 the
spirit of  the Code  of Criminal Procedure especially in the
matter	of   persons  sought  to  be  bound  over  for	good
behaviour, persons  against whom  summons cases	 are pending
and persons  who have  been in	custody for  more  than	 six
months This  will involve  a mass  release from	 jails,	 but
Government has to pay homage in substance and reality to the
provisions of the Constitution and the Code. [787C]
     The Court directed that :-
     (a) The  State do	consent to  release all	 persons who
have been  in custody  for over	 six months and whose trials
have not  commenced or	against whom  charge sheets have not
been laid  excepting in	 those cases  under Sections 302 and
395 I.P.C. [786G]
     (b) The  State shall  complete investigation within two
months in  cases where	charge sheets  have not	 been  laid.
[786H]
     (c) The  Sessions Court concerned should dispose of the
cases where  chargesheets have	been laid and commitment has
been made within six months.
						      [786H]



JUDGMENT:
     CRIMINAL ORIGINAL	JURISDICTION : Writ Petition No. 211
of 1979.
     K. Hingorani for the Petitioners.
     D. N. Mukherjee for the Respondents.
     The Order of the Court was delivered by
     KRISHNA IYER, J.-This is a petition for the issuance of
a writ of habeas corpus in view of alleged illegal detention
of a  large number  of persons	under guise  of the judicial
process.
786
     Even without  going into details, we are satisfied that
petitioners Nos.  3 and	 4 should  be released	on their own
bonds to  the satisfaction  of the  trial court	 subject  to
their reporting	 to the	 nearest police	 station once  every
fortnight and  appearing in court whenever called upon to do
so to take their trial. We direct accordingly.
     So far  as petitioner  No. 1 is concerned, the State in
its affidavit  swear that there is no such person in custody
in connection with any case. This matter will be scrutinised
further by  the State  so that it may satisfy itself that no
one is in custody except under due process of law.
     This Court in its earlier order dated March 5, 1979 has
directed  the	State  to   file  a   statement	  containing
particulars of	the  under-trial  prisoners  who  have	been
confined in  Jail for  a period	 of over  six months without
their trials  having commenced.	 Further details  as to	 the
ages of	 such under-trials,  the dates	from which they were
confined and  the offences with which they were charged were
also called  for. In  the reply	 statement  put	 in  by	 the
respondent, we	find a large number of cases where detention
for considerable  periods, without  the	 trial	having	even
commenced, is  being suffered  by various  persons. Criminal
justice breaks	down, at  a point  when expeditious trial is
not attempted  while the affected parties are languishing in
jail. The  Criminal Procedure  Code in sections 167, 209 and
309 has emphasised the importance of expeditious disposal of
cases	including   investigations   and   trials.   It	  is
unfortunate, indeed  pathetic, that  there should  have been
such considerable  delay in  investigations by the police in
utter disregard of the fact that a citizen has been deprived
of his	freedom on  the ground	that he	 is  accused  of  an
offence. We  do not approve of this course and breach of the
rule of	 law and  express our  strong  displeasure  at	this
chaotic state  of affairs  verging on  wholesale  breach  of
human rights  guaranteed under	the Constitution  especially
under Article 21 as interpreted by this Court.
     Even so we do not wish to pass any orders at the moment
until more  particulars are  brought to	 our notice. It will
suffice for the present-and counsel for the State assures us
that any  direction given  by this  Court will	be  promptly
complied with-that we direct the State to consent to release
all persons who have been in custody for over six months and
whose trials  have not	commenced  or  against	whom  charge
sheets have  not been  laid. But make one exception in cases
where sections 302 and 395, IPC are involved. We direct that
the State shall complete the investigation within two months
from today  where charge  sheets  have	not  been  laid	 and
further direct	the Sessions  Court concerned  to dispose of
the cases  where charge sheets have been laid and commitment
has been  made, within	six months from today. A report will
be made to
787
this Court at the end of six months from today by the State.
We must	 emphatically record  our view that there has been a
self-condemnation in  the statement  put  in  by  the  State
Government in  that in quite a number of cases which are not
of a  serious character	 and even  in  those  which  involve
serious	 offences,  investigations  have  been	pending	 for
nearly two years. There are cases where persons have been in
custody	 for  five  years-a  situation	too  ghastly  for  a
civilised country like ours. We therefore draw the attention
of the	State Government  to take  a policy  decision with a
view to	 ensure that accused persons, too indigent to set in
motion the  judicial process,  do not  suffer  incarceration
silently. The  Government will	do well	 to comply  with the
spirit of  the Code  of Criminal Procedure especially in the
matter	of   persons  sought  to  be  bound  over  for	good
behaviour, persons  against whom  summons cases	 are pending
and persons  who have  been in	custody for  more  than	 six
months. Maybe  this will  involve a mass release from Jails,
but Government has to pay homage in substance and reality to
the provisions	of the Constitution and the Code. With these
observations, and directions, we dispose of this petition.
N.V.K.					   Petition disposed
788




