

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Hardip Singh & Anr vs The Income Tax Officer, Amritsar & ... on 26 April, 1979Equivalent citations: 1979 AIR 1453, 1979 SCR  (3) 781
Author: N Untwalia
Bench: Untwalia, N.L.
           PETITIONER:
HARDIP SINGH & ANR.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
THE INCOME TAX OFFICER, AMRITSAR & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT26/04/1979

BENCH:
UNTWALIA, N.L.
BENCH:
UNTWALIA, N.L.
PATHAK, R.S.
VENKATARAMIAH, E.S. (J)

CITATION:
 1979 AIR 1453		  1979 SCR  (3) 781
 1979 SCC  (3) 345


ACT:
     Income Tax	 Act  1961-S.  179-Scope  of-Resolution	 for
winding up of company passed before the coming into force of
the  Act-I.T.O.	  issued  notices  to  Managing	 Director  &
Director to  pay large	tax arrears  due from  the company -
Notice if valid.
     Section 179  of the Income-tax Act, 1961 (before it was
amended in  1975) provided  that when any private company is
wound up  after the  commencement of  the Act  and  any	 tax
assessed on  the company  whether before or in the course of
or after  its liquidation  in respect  of any  income of any
previous year  cannot be  recovered, then,  every person who
was a director of the private company at any time during the
relevant previous year shall be jointly and severally liable
for the payment of such tax.



HEADNOTE:
     The appellants  were the managing director and director
of a  private  limited	company.  On  November	13,  1961  a
resolution for	voluntary liquidation of the private company
was passed.  In February  and November,	 1970 the Income Tax
Officer issued	notices to  the appellants calling upon them
to pay	income tax which remained unpaid from the company to
the tune of Rs. 1.34 lakhs.
     The contention  of the  appellants that the company had
gone into  liquidation before the Act came into force on 1st
April, 1962  and, therefore,  s. 179  had no  application to
this case  was	rejected  by  the  Income-tax  Officer.	 The
appellants'  revision	petition   was	 rejected   by	 the
Commissioner; the  High Court  dismissed their writ petition
in limine.
     Dismissing the appeal,
^
     HELD :  The appellants  could  not	 escape	 from  their
liability to  pay the  tax dues.  Section 179  was meant  to
cover cases of this nature also. [784A]
     There  are	 three	stages	when  a	 company  goes	into
liquidation, namely : (1) the commencement of the winding up
of the	company; (2)  continuation of the proceedings or the
steps  for   winding  up   and	(3)  final  winding  up	 and
dissolution of the company. Section 179 will be attracted if
any one	 or more  of the  three stages	occurred  after	 the
commencement of	 the Act  even though the first or the first
and second  events had	happened earlier. The directors were
made liable  to pay  the tax dues because on its liquidation
it becomes  difficult for  the department to realise the tax
dues from the assets of the company.
						    [783D-E]
     In the  instant case,  although the commencement of the
winding up  of the  company had begun on a date prior to the
date of	 commencement of  the Act,  at	the  time  when	 the
Income-tax  officer   issued  notice,  proceedings  for	 its
winding up were pending.



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION : Civil Appeal No. 2390 of
1972. From the Judgment and Order dated 7-3-72 of the Punjab
and
782
Haryana High Court in Civil Writ No. 773/72.
     Bhagirath Das,  B. P.  Maheshwari and  Suresh Sethi for
the Appellants.
     P.	 A.   Francis  and   Miss  A.	Subhashini  for	 the
Respondents.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     UNTWALIA, J.  This is an appeal by certificate from the
order of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana dismissing the
appellants writ	 application  in  limine.  Sandhu  Transport
Company (Private)  Limited is a private limited company. The
two appellants	were  its  directors.  One  of	them  was  a
Managing Director.  A resolution  was  passed  on  the	13th
November, 1961 for a voluntary liquidation of the company at
the instance  of its  creditors. In  respect of	 some  years
ending with  the assessment  year 1964-65  a huge  amount of
income tax  to the  tune of Rs. 1,34,319/- remained due from
the company.  The Income  Tax officer issued a notice on 7th
of February,  1970 against appellant No. 2 under Section 179
of the	Income Tax  Act 1961, hereinafter called the Act, to
show cause  why action	should	not  be	 taken	against	 the
directors of  the company  for realisation of the arrears of
income-tax due from the company. A similar notice was issued
to appellant  No. 1  on the 11th of November, 1970. Both the
appellants filed  their show  cause before  the	 Income	 Tax
Officer mainly	taking the  stand that since the company had
gone into  liquidation before  the Act	had come into force,
action under  Section 179  could not  be taken against them.
Some other points were also taken in the show cause filed by
the appellants	but it is not necessary to state them as the
only point  pressed in	this Court  is in  relation  to	 the
jurisdiction of	 the Income Tax Officer under Section 179 of
the Act.
     The Income	 Tax Officer  rejected the appellants' pleas
by his	order dated  the 31st December, 1970. The appellants
went in	 revision before  the Commissioner of Income Tax. It
was  rejected	on  31st  January,  1972.  Thereafter,	when
proceedings were  taken for  realisation of  the  income-tax
arrears aforesaid against the appellants they moved the High
Court for  the quashing	 of the	 proceedings and  the orders
under Section  179 of  the Act.	 As already  stated the High
Court rejected	their application in limine, but certificate
to appeal to this Court was granted only because of the rule
of valuation then prevalent.
 Section 179 of the Act as it stood at the relevant time
read as follows :-
	  179. Liability  of directors of private company in
liquidation-Notwithstanding anything contained in the Com-
783
     panies Act,  1956 (1  of 1956) when any private company
is wound  up after the commencement of this Act, and any tax
assessed on  the company, whether before or in the course of
or after  its liquidation,  in respect	of any income of any
previous year  cannot be  recovered, then,  every person who
was a director of the private company at any time during the
relevant previous year shall be jointly and severally liable
for the	 payment of  such tax unless he proves that the non-
recovery  cannot   be  attributed   to	any  gross  neglect,
misfeasance or breach of duty on his part in relation to the
affairs of the company".
     The  Section   was	 amended  in  1975  making  it	more
stringent against the directors of a private company, but we
are not concerned with the said amendment in this case.
     There  are	 three	stages	when  a	 company  goes	into
liquidation, namely :-(1) the commencement of the winding up
of the	company, (2)  the continuation	of the proceeding or
the steps  for winding	up and	(3) the final winding up and
dissolution of	the company.  If all  the three	 stages were
complete before	 the Act came into force on and from the 1st
April, 1962, obviously Section 179 will not be attracted. If
all of	the three  stages happened after the commencement of
the Act,  it is	 manifest that Section 179 would undoubtedly
be attracted.  But the	difficulty presented  before  us  by
learned counsel	 for the  appellants  was  because  of	some
speciality of  the facts  of this  case, the commencement of
the winding  up of  the company	 began on  a date  which was
prior to  the date of commencement of the Act. As it appears
from  the   orders  of	 the  Income  Tax  Officer  and	 the
Commissioner the company had not even till then been finally
wound up  and dissolved.  The proceedings for its winding up
were pending.  The submission,	therefore, is that in such a
case  Section	179  will  not	be  attracted.	We  have  no
difficulty in  rejecting this  argument. In  our opinion the
Section will  be attracted  if any  one or more of the three
events occurred	 after the  commencement  of  the  Act	even
though the first or the first and second events had happened
earlier. The  Section was  meant also to net a case like the
instant one  where it  was resolved that the private company
should be  sent to  liquidation and  nobody cared to pay the
huge arrears  of income-tax  due from it. The Directors were
sought to  be caught  exactly for  this	 purpose.  When	 the
company goes  into liquidation	it becomes difficult for the
department to  realise its  dues  from	the  assets  of	 the
company and  more so when the company has been finally would
up and	dissolved. The	directors, therefore, have been made
liable to
784
pay such dues. Section 179 is meant to squarely cover such a
case also  and the  appellants cannot escape their liability
for the dues. The proceedings were rightly initiated against
them for  realisation  of  the	dues.  The  High  Court	 was
perfectly  justified  in  dismissing  the  appellants'	writ
petition in limine.
     We find  no merit	in this appeal and it is accordingly
dismissed with costs.
P.B.R.					   Appeal dismissed.
785




