

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Controller Of Estate Duty vs Kamlavati And Shri Jai Gopal Mehra on 5 September, 1979Equivalent citations: 1980 AIR  142, 1980 SCR  (1) 527
Author: N Untwalia
Bench: Untwalia, N.L.
           PETITIONER:
CONTROLLER OF ESTATE DUTY

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
KAMLAVATI AND SHRI JAI GOPAL MEHRA

DATE OF JUDGMENT05/09/1979

BENCH:
UNTWALIA, N.L.
BENCH:
UNTWALIA, N.L.
PATHAK, R.S.
VENKATARAMIAH, E.S. (J)

CITATION:
 1980 AIR  142		  1980 SCR  (1) 527
 1979 SCC  (4) 262
 CITATOR INFO :
 F	    1986 SC 631	 (5,14)
 D	    1987 SC 785	 (22)
 APR	    1988 SC1426	 (16)


ACT:
     Estate Duty  Act, s.  10-Scope of-Deceased gifted money
to son-Son  became  partner  of	 the  firm  in	which  donor
continued to  be partner-Gift-Whether  dutiable on the death
of father.



HEADNOTE:
     The deceased was a partner in a partnership firm with a
half share  in it.  On March  27, 1957 he made a gift of Rs.
1,00,000/- to  his son	and Rs.	 50,000/-to  his  wife,	 the
respondent. Almost  simultaneously his	son was	 taken as  a
partner by  giving him	half share  of the deceased, so that
from that  time onwards there were four partners of whom the
deceased and his son had 1/4 share each. On the death of the
deceased in 1962 his 4/1 share was taken by his wife and son
equally.
     The  Revenue   Authorities	 included  the	sum  of	 Rs.
1,50,000/ in  the estate of the deceased for the purposes of
estate duty.  On appeal the Tribunal was of the view that s.
10 of  the Estate  Duty Act  was not attracted to the gifts.
The High  Court answered  the reference	 in  favour  of	 the
assessee.
     Dismissing the Revenue's appeal
^
     HELD: The	Tribunal as well as the High Court was right
in holding that no estate duty was payable in respect of the
two sums. [537B]
     1. When  property is  gifted by a donor, possession and
enjoyment of which is allowed in a partnership firm in which
the donor  was a  partner, the	mere fact that the donor was
sharing the  enjoyment or  benefit in  the property  is	 not
sufficient for	the application	 of s.	10 of the Act unless
such enjoyment	or benefit is clearly referable to the gift.
If possession,	enjoyment or  benefit of  the donor  in	 the
property is  consistent with  the facts and circumstances of
the case,  other than  those of	 the factum of gift, then it
cannot be  said that  the donee	 had not retained possession
and enjoyment of the property to the entire exclusion of the
donor, or,  to the  entire exclusion  of the  donor  in	 any
benefit to  him	 by  contract  or  otherwise.  It  makes  no
difference whether  the donee  is a partner in the firm from
before or  is taken  as such  at the  time of the gift or he
becomes a  creditor of	the partnership firm by allowing the
firm to	 make use of the gifted property for the purposes of
the partnership. [535G-H]
     (a) Although  in a	 given case  the donee	assumes bona
fide possession	 and enjoyment	of the	property immediately
upon the  gift to  the entire exclusion of the donor, if the
donee thenceforth does not retain it to the entire exclusion
of the	donor the gift is dutiable. In Chick's case the gift
was without  reservation  and  qualification  and  the	sons
assumed and  enjoyed the  property to  the exclusion  of the
father. Yet  a few years later when the donor-father and the
donees entered	into partnership,  each partner's  property,
including the one gifted by
528
the father,  was  made	available  as  the  capital  of	 the
business and  property	of  the	 partnership.  Each  of	 the
partners was in possession and enjoyment of the property and
allowed the  others to	derive benefit	out of	the property
gifted, so  long as the partnership subsisted. The gift was,
therefore, dutiable.  In Munro's  case on the other hand the
gift was  of a property shorn of certain of the rights which
appertain to complete ownership and after the gift the donor
had remained  in possession  and enjoyment  of those  rights
which were not the subject matter of the gift. The gift was,
therefore, not dutiable.
						   [531 E-H]
     (b)Interpreting s.	 10 of	the Estate  Duty Act (before
the second  proviso was added) this Court held in Da Costa's
case that  the donor-father  who stayed with his sons in the
house till his death after the house was gifted to them, the
donor had  not been  entirely excluded	from possession	 and
enjoyment of  the gifted  property and, therefore, s. 10 was
attracted. It  was further  held  that	the  expression	 "by
contract or otherwise" in second limb of the section did not
control the  words "to the entire exclusion of the donor" in
the first limb.
						    [533A-B]
     (c) In  Gounder's case the donor who was a partner of a
firm gifted  to his  two sons house property which was under
the occupation	of the firm as a tenant at will and the firm
thereafter paid	 rent to  the donees.  In addition, a sum of
Rs. 1  lakh transferred	 by the donor in the firm's books of
account and  credited to  the accounts	of the	donor's five
sons, remained invested with the firm on which the firm paid
interest to  the sons.	This  Court  applying  the  rule  in
Munro's case  held that what was gifted by the donor was the
whole of  the property	minus the  rights of the partnership
which were  shared and	enjoyed by  the donor  as well.	 The
donor was  enjoying that bundle of rights in the partnership
which he was enjoying before the gift and this did not bring
the case within the ambit of s. 10. In the case of the house
property the  possession which	the donor could give was the
legal possession.  The benefit	which the  donor  had  as  a
member of  the partnership  was not the benefit referable in
any way to the gift but is unconnected therewith.
						      [534E-
F]
     (d) But  in Gounder's  case the implicit departure from
Chick's case was when it was said that the benefit the donor
had received  as a  member of  the  partnership	 was  not  a
benefit referable  in any way to the gift but is unconnected
therewith. This	 departure can	be attributable	 to the very
subtle distinction  in the  facts of the two cases : whereas
in Chick's  case the  donor  as	 a  partner  came  to  share
possession and	enjoyment of the property by the partnership
firm long  after the  gift, in	Gounder's case	the  benefit
which the  donor was  enjoying as  a partner in the property
gifted was  existing at	 the time  of the  gift	 itself	 and
continued to  exist even  thereafter. It  was not exactly on
the basis of Munro's case that it was said so.
[534G]
     (e) Where	the gift  of money was in a partnership firm
in which  the donor  was a partner and the donees were taken
as partners  it was  held that	the benefit  in the property
viz. the  money gifted	which the  donees were	enjoying and
continued to  enjoy as	partners was not sufficient to bring
the case  within the  ambit of	s. 10  irrespective  of	 the
question whether  that benefit	was referable to the gift or
not. In other words if the benefit was referable to the gift
then the property would be covered by s. 10, otherwise not.
[535A-B]
529
     (f) In Controller of Estate Duty v. R. V. Viswanathan &
Ors. the  transfer   of the  gifted sums was made subject to
the condition  that the	 sons would use them as capital, not
for any	 benefit of the deceased donor, but for each of them
becoming entitled  to 1/7th  share in the business. The fact
that the  partnership may  make use  of the  sums  of  money
gifted in  which the  donor also  was a partner did not mean
that he	 was allowed  to enjoy	or derive any benefit in the
money gifted  which could  be referable	 to the gift itself.
[535D-E]
     2. (a) Where the sums gifted by the donor were invested
in the	firm in	 which the  donor was  a partner, the donees
remained creditors  of the  firm. The  rule  in	 Munro's  is
applicable. [537G]
     (b) If  a firm  borrows money so as to be itself liable
for it	to the	lender the  capital of	the firm  is no more
increased than	is the	capital of an ordinary individual is
increased by  his  getting  into  debt.	 The  capital  of  a
partnership is not, therefore, the same as its property even
treating it  as the  partnership property.  The	 partnership
property does not belong to a co-partner in the sense of his
being a co-owner. The partnership firm is not a legal entity
in the	sense of  having a  legal personality  of  its	own,
different from	that of	 the partners.	But no	partner	 can
claim a	 share in  the partnership property according to his
share in  the partnership.  A creditor of the partnership is
entitled  to   get  back   the	whole  of  his	property  on
dissolution of	the firm  or otherwise,	 while a  partner is
entitled to  get a  share in  the net assets of the property
realised on the winding up of the partnership. [536C-E]
     Clifford John  Chick and  Another	v.  Commissioner  of
Stamp Duty 37 I.T.R. 89 (ED), Munro v. Commissioner of Stamp
Duties [1934] Appeal Cases 61, George Da Costa v. Controller
of Estate  Duty, Mysore	 63 I.T.R  497=[1967] 1 S.C.R. 1004,
Controller of  Estate Duty,  Madras  v.	 C.  R.	 Ramachandra
Gounder 88  I.T.R. 448=[1975]  3 S.C.R. 554, Commissioner of
Income Tax  and Controller  of Estate  Duty, Madras v. N. R.
Ramarathnam and	 Others; 91  I.T.R. 1=[1974]  1 S.C.R.	372,
Controller of  Estate Duty,  Kerala v. R. V. Viswanathan and
Others, 105 I.T.R. 653 explained.



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION :  Civil Appeal Nos. 2527
and 2528 of 1972.
     From the  Judgment and  Order dated  10-3-1971  of	 the
Punjab and  Haryana High  Court in  Income Tax Reference No.
12/68 and 5/69.
     S. T. Desai, S. P. Nayar and Miss A. Subhashini for the
Appellant in both the appeals.
     Bhagirath Das, B. P. Maheshwari and Suresh Seth for the
Respondent in CA No. 2528/72.
     Ex-parte against respondents in C.A. 2527/72.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     UNTWALLA J.  These two  appeals by certificate filed by
the Controller	of Estate Duty are from the Judgments of the
Punjab &  Haryana High	Court. Both  the appeals  have	been
heard together as a common
530
question of  law is  involved in  them. It  relates  to	 the
interpretation and  applicability of Section 10 of the Etate
Duty Act, 1953, hereinafter called the Act.
     We shall  first proceed  to state the facts and discuss
the law	 in Civil  Appeal 2527	of  1972.  Even	 though	 the
respondent, Smt.  Kamlavati, was  not  represented  in	this
appeal, Mr.  S. T. Desai, learned counsel for the appellant,
assisted the  court very  ably	and  fairly.  In  the  other
appeal, being  Civil Appeal  2528 of  1972, Shri  Jai  Gopal
Mehra, the  respondent, was  represented by  Mr.  Bhagirathi
Das. The main judgment of the Full Bench of High Court is in
this Civil  Appeal, and	 it has	 followed the  ratio of this
decision in  the other	appeal also.  We, however,  find  it
convenient  to	first  discuss	the  question  of  law	with
reference to the facts of Civil Appeal 2527 of 1972.
     Maharaj Mal,  the deceased,  with whose  estate we	 are
concerned in  this appeal,  was a  partner in  a partnership
firm styled  as M/s  Maharaj Mal  Hans Raj. Mahraj Mal had a
half share in the partnership. The other two partners namely
Jialal and  Hansraj had each 1/4th share. On the 27th March,
1957 Maharaj  Mal made	a gift	of Rs.	1,00,000 to his son,
Lalit Kumar,  and of  Rs. 50,000  to his wife, Kamlavati. In
the books  of the  partnership firm the sums of Rs. 1,50,000
were debited  in the  account of Maharaj Mal and credited to
the accounts  of Lalit	Kumar and Kamlavati, Rs. 1,00,000 in
the name  of Lalit  Kumar and  Rs. 50,000  in  the  name  of
Kamlavati.  Almost  simultaneously  with  effect  from	28th
March, 1957  as per  the instrument of partnership dated the
2nd April,  1957 Lalit	Kumar was  taken as a partner in the
firm of	 M/s Maharaj  Mal Hans Raj by giving him 1/4th share
out of	the half  share of Maharaj Mal. In other words, with
effect from  the said  date there  were four partners in the
firm each holding 1/4th share.
     On the  17th December,  1957, Hans	 Raj died and in his
place his  widow Smt. Rup Rani was taken as a partner in the
firm getting  1/4th share, the share of her husband. Maharaj
Mal died on the 9th January, 1962. On his death the firm was
again reconstituted  with Jialal and Rup Rani each retaining
1/4th share,  Lalit Kumar  getting 3/8th  share, i.e., 1/4th
his own	 share augmented  by half of 1/4th share of deceased
Maharaj Mal.  The remaining half of Maharaj Mal's share i.e,
1/8th was given to Kamlavati.
     The Revenue  Authorities relying  upon the	 judgment of
the Privy  Council in  the case	 of Clifford  John Chick and
Another	 v.  Commissioner  of  Stamp  Duty(1)  as  also	 the
judgment of the Calcutta High
531
Court in  the case of Rash Mohan Chatterjee v. Controller of
Estate Duty,  West Bengal(1), held that the said sums of Rs.
1,50,000 were  includible for  the purposes  of	 the  estate
duty. The  accountable person  took the	 matter	 in  further
appeal before  the Appellate  Tribunal, which  took the view
that the  provisions of	 Section 10  of	 the  Act  were	 not
attracted to  the two  amounts of gifts made by the deceased
to his	wife and son and, therefore, the accountable persons
were not liable to pay any estate duty on them. The Tribunal
on being  asked by  the revenue made a reference to the High
Court under  Section 64(1)  of	the  Act  and  referred	 the
following question of law for its opinion:-
	  "Whether on  the facts and in the circumstances of
     the case,	the provisions	of section 10 of Estate Duty
     Act did  apply to	the gifts of Rs. 1,00,000 and of Rs.
     50,000 made  by  the  deceased  to	 his  son  and	wife
     respectively ?"
     On a  consideration of the various authorities the High
Court has  affirmed the	 view of  the Tribunal and hence the
appeal.
     Although  Section	 10  of	  the  Act   came   up	 for
consideration of  this Court  in many  cases wherein several
English decisions were reviewed and the law was laid down as
precisely as  was possible  to be  done on the facts of each
case, in the application of the principles, Courts are still
faced with difficulty resulting in some cleavage of opinion.
We, therefore,	think it  necessary to	review some of those
cases over again.
     In the case of Clifford John Chick (supra) the question
for consideration before the Judicial Committee of the Privy
Council related	 to the	 interpretation and applicability of
Section 102  of the  New South Wales Stamp Duties Act, which
was in	pari materia  with Section  10 of  our Act.  In 1934
father of  Clifford John Chick transferred by way of gift to
his son	 the property in question. The gift was made without
reservation or	qualification or  condition.  In  1935,	 the
deceased, his  son  Clifford  John  Chick  and	another	 son
entered into  an agreement  to carry  on in  partnership the
business  of  graziers	and  stock  dealers.  The  agreement
provided, inter	 alia, that the father should be the manager
of the	business and  that his	decision should be final and
conclusive in  connection with	all matters  relating to its
conduct. Each  partner's property  including the  one gifted
was made  available as	the  capital  of  the  business	 and
property of  the partnership.  The partnership continued for
quite a	 good number  of years until the donor died in 1952.
In such a situation the Privy Council held that although the
first part  of sub-section  2(d) of  Section  102  had	been
satisfied in  that the	son had assumed bona fide possession
and enjoyment of the
532
property immediately  upon the	gift to the entire exclusion
of the	father, he  had not  thenceforth retained  it to the
father's  entire   exclusion,  for   under  the	 partnership
agreement, the	partners and each of them were in possession
and enjoyment  of the  property so  long as  the partnership
subsisted. Viscount  Simonds delivering	 the opinion  of the
Board distinguished an earlier decision of the Privy Council
in Munro  v. Commissioner  of Stamp  Duties(1) on the ground
that in	 Munro's case  the gift	 was of	 a property shorn of
certain of  the rights which appertain to complete ownership
and after  the gift the donor had remained in possession and
enjoyment of  those rights  and of  no other right which was
the subject  matter of	the gift.  To start with, therefore,
the ratio in Chick's case is that if the donor is allowed to
be in  possession and enjoyment of or derive any benefit out
of the	property gifted then Section 10 of the Act will make
such property,	dutiable. If, on the other hand, the donor's
possession, enjoyment  or benefit  is not  relatable to	 the
property gifted	 but to	 something outside it then no estate
duty is chargeable in respect of such property.
 Section 10	 came up for consideration before this Court
in the case of George Da Costa v. Controller of Estate Duty,
Mysore(2). The	said decision  was given  in  respect  of  a
period when  the second proviso to Section 10 was not in the
Act as	the same  was introduced  by Central  Act 10 of 1965
with effect  from 1-4-1965.  This was a clear case where the
donor had  been allowed to stay-in the gifted house till his
death even after the house was gifted to his sons. Ramaswami
J. delivering  the judgment  on behalf of the Court analysed
Section 10  with reference  to some  other provisions of the
Act and said at page 501:-
	  "The crux  of the  section lies  in two parts: (1)
     the donee	must bona  fide have  assumed possession and
     enjoyment of  the property, which is the subject-matter
     of the gift, to the exclusion of the donor, immediately
     upon the  gift, and  (2) the  donee must  have retained
     such possession  and enjoyment  of the  property to the
     entire exclusion of the donor or of any benefit to him,
     by contract  or otherwise.	 As a matter of construction
     we are  of	 opinion  that	both  these  conditions	 are
     cumulative.  Unless   each	 of   these  conditions	  is
     satisfied, the  property would be liable to estate duty
     under section 10 of the Act."
The learned  Judge further pointed out that the "second part
of the	section has two limbs: the deceased must be entirely
excluded, (i)
533
from the  property, and (ii) from any benefit by contract or
otherwise, the	word 'otherwise'  to  be  construed  ejusdem
generis." But it would be noticed that in the opinion of the
Court the  case of the Revenue rightly rested upon the first
limb as the deceased had not been entirely excluded from the
possession  and	  enjoyment  of	 the  property	gifted.	 The
expression "by	contract or  otherwise",  occurring  in	 the
second limb of the section did not control the words "to the
entire exclusion of the donor" in the first limb.
     In the  case of Controller of Estate Duty, Madras v. C.
R. Ramachandra	Gounder(1) the	donor who was a partner in a
firm owned  a property	which  the  firm  was  occupying  as
tenant-at-will. He executed a deed of settlement under which
he transferred	the property  leased out  to the firm to his
two sons.  But the firm continued to be in occupation of the
premises paying	 rent  to  the	donees	after  the  deed  of
settlement. The	 deceased had  further directed	 the firm to
transfer from  his account a sum of Rs. 20,000 to the credit
of each	 of his	 five sons  in the  firm's books with effect
from April  1, 1953. In the account of each of the sons, the
sum of	Rs. 20,000  gifted to  him was credited. The amounts
remained invested  with the  firm on which interest was paid
to the	sons. The  deceased continued to be a partner of the
firm till  April 13,  1957, when  the firm was dissolved and
thereafter he  died on May 5, 1957. The question was whether
the value  of the house property and the sum of Rs. 1,00,000
could be  included in  the principal  value of the estate of
the deceased  as property deemed to pass under Section 10 of
the Act.  This Court  held that no estate duty was liable to
be charged  on either  of the properties. The main principle
is discussed  with  reference  to  the	house  property	 and
approving the  decision of the Mysore High Court in the case
of Controller of Estate Duty v. Aswathanarayana Setty(2) the
same principle	was applied with reference to the sum of Rs.
1,00,000 also.	The ratio in Munro's case as also in another
decision of  the Privy	Council	 in  Commissioner  of  Stamp
Duties of  New South Wales v. Perpectual Trustee Co. Ltd.(3)
was applied and it was held:-
	  "The	donor	could,	therefore,   only   transfer
     possession of  the property  which the  nature of	that
     property was  capable of, which in this case is subject
     to the  tenancy. He  could do  nothing else to transfer
     the possession in any other
534
     manner unless  he was  required to	 effectuate the gift
     for the purpose of section 10 of the Act by getting the
     firm to vacate the premises and handing over possession
     of the same to the donees leaving the donees thereafter
     to lease it out to the firm. Even then the objection of
     the learned advocate that since the donor was a partner
     in the  firm which	 had taken the property on lease, he
     derived  benefit  therefrom  and  was,  therefore,	 not
     entirely excluded	from the  possession  and  enjoyment
     thereof, will  nevertheless remain	 unsatisfied. To get
     over such	on objection,  the donees will have to lease
     out the property after getting possession from the firm
     to some  other  person  totally  unconnected  with	 the
     donor. Such  an unreasonable  requirement the  law does
     not postulate.  The possession which the donor can give
     is the legal possession which the circumstances and the
     nature of	the property would admit. This he has given.
     The  benefit   the	 donor	 had  as  a  member  of	 the
     partnership was  not a  benefit referable in any way to
     the gift but is unconnected therewith.
     It should	be noticed  that, though  not explicitly but
implicitly, some  departure was	 made from  the ratio of the
Privy Council case in Chick's. When the principle of Munro's
case was applied it was on the basis that what was gifted by
the donor  was the whole of the property minus the rights of
the partnership	 which were  shared and enjoyed by the donor
also; the  donor enjoying  the same  bundle of rights in the
partnership which  he was  enjoying before  the gift did not
bring the  case within	the ambit  of section  10.  But	 the
implicit departure  from the  Chick's case  was when  it was
said that  the benefit	the donor had had as a member of the
partnership was	 not a	benefit referable  in any way to the
gift but  is unconnected  therewith. This  departure can  be
attributed to  the very	 subtle distinction  in the facts of
the two	 cases and  it is  necessary to	 highlight them.  In
Chick's case  the donor	 as a  partner	came  to  share	 the
possession and	enjoyment of the property by the partnership
firm long  after the  gift, while  in Gounder's	 the benefit
which the  donor was  enjoying as  a partner in the property
gifted was  existing at	 the time  of the  gift	 itself	 and
continued to  exist even  thereafter. It  was not exactly on
the basis  of Munro's  case that it was said so. Similar was
the view  expressed by the Mysore High Court in Setty's case
in relation to the gift of money in a partnership firm where
the donor  was a partner and the sons, the donees, were also
taken as  partners. Even  then, it  was pointed out that the
benefit in  the property  namely the  money gifted which the
donor was  enjoying and	 continued to enjoy as a partner was
not
535
sufficient to  bring the case within the ambit of Section 10
irrespective  of  the  question	 whether  that	benefit	 was
referable or not to the gift. In other words, if the benefit
was referable to the gift then the property would be covered
by Section  10, otherwise  not. The same Bench which decided
Gounder's followed it in the case of Commissioner of Income-
tax  and   Controller  of  Estate  Duty,  Madras  v.  N.  R.
Ramarathnam and Others(1). In this case the fact in relation
to the	gifts of  money by  the donor in favour of his three
sons and  the daughter	were almost  identical to  those  of
Gounder's except  that the three sons and daughter were also
partners in the firm. Yet applying the ratio in Gounder's it
was held  that the  amounts gifted  were not  chargeable  to
estate duty under section 10.
     We may  now refer	to the	decision of  a Bench of this
Court to  which one  of us  (Untwalia J.) was a party in the
case  of   Controller  of  Estate  Duty,  Kerala  v.  R.  V.
Viswanathan  and   Others(2).  The  deceased  was  the	sole
proprietor of  the business.  He  gifted  the  sums  of	 Rs.
2,70,000 to  his four  major and  two minor  sons  each	 son
getting a sum of Rs. 45,000. The transfers were made by book
entries. It  was held that there was no absolute transfer of
the sum	 of Rs.	 2,70,000. It  was a  part of  the scheme to
transfer 6/7th shares in the business in favour of the sons.
The transfer was made subject to the condition that the sons
would use  it as capital not for any benefit of the deceased
donor but  for each of them becoming entitled to 1/7th share
in the	business. In  other words,  the mere  fact that	 the
partnership may	 make use  of the  sums of  money gifted  in
which the  donor also was a partner did not mean that he was
allowed to  enjoy or  drive any benefit in the money gifted,
which could be referable to the gift itself.
     To avoid  the conflict  in the application of the ratio
of the	various Supreme	 Court cases  as seems	to have been
done by	 some of  the High  Courts, we would like to clarify
and elucidate some of the aspects and facets of the matter a
bit further.  When a  property is  gifted  by  a  donor	 the
possession  and	  enjoyment  of	  which	 is   allowed  to  a
partnership firm  in which  the donor is a partner, then the
mere fact  of the donor sharing the enjoyment or the benefit
in the	property is  not sufficient  for the  application of
Section 10  of the  Act until  and unless  such enjoyment or
benefit is  clearly referable  to the  gift,  i.e.,  to	 the
parting with  such enjoyment  or benefit  by  the  donee  or
permitting the	donor to  share them  out of  the bundle  of
rights gifted  in the property. If the possession, enjoyment
or benefit of the donor in the property
536
is consistent  with the other facts and circumstances of the
case, other than those of the factum of gift, then it cannot
be said	 that the  donee had not retained the possession and
enjoyment of  the property  to the  entire exclusion  of the
donor, or,  to the  entire exclusion  of the  donor  in	 any
benefit to  him	 by  contract  or  otherwise.  It  makes  no
difference whether  the donee  is a partner in the firm from
before or  is taken  as such  at the  time of the gift or he
becomes a creditor of the partnership firm by allowing it to
make use  of the  gifted property  for the  purposes of	 the
partnership. It	 should be  remembered	as  pointed  out  by
Lindley on  Partnership Twelfth	 Edition at  page 178:-"If a
firm borrows  money so	as to be itself liable for it to the
lender, the capital of the firm is no more increased than is
the capital  of an  ordinary  individual  increased  by	 his
getting into debt." Although as pointed out at page 357 "The
capital of  a partnership  is not  therefore the same as its
property," even treating it as the partnership property, the
partnership property  does not belong to a co-partner in the
sense of his being a co-owner. The partnership firm is not a
legal entity  in the  sense of having a legal personality of
its own	 different from that of the partners. But no partner
can claim  a share  in the partnership property according to
his share  in the partnership. A creditor of the partnership
is entitled  to get  back  the	whole  of  his	property  on
dissolution of	the firm  or otherwise,	 while a  partner is
entitled to  get a  share in  the net assets of the property
realized on the winding up of the partnership.
     Mr. Desai	heavily relied	upon  the  decision  of	 the
Gujarat High  Court in	the case  of Sekarlal  Chunilal	 and
Others	v.   Controller	 of   Estate  Duty,   Gujarat.(1)  A
distinction was	 drawn after  distinguishing the decision of
this Court  in Gounder's  case	between	 the  gifts  of	 Rs.
2,00,000 each  in favour  of the two donees and the gifts of
the sums  of Rs. 1,20,000 and the sum of Rs. 1,99,500 gifted
to the other donees on the ground that the former was not an
absolute  gift	 but  was   subject  to	 the  right  of	 the
partnership firm  while the  latter assumed the character of
first there  being an  absolute gift  and thereafter parting
with a	portion of  the enjoyment  and benefit in the gifted
property in  favour of	the donor  by investing the money in
the partnership.  In the enunciation of the principle of law
there  is  no  appreciable,  as	 there	could  not  be	any,
difference between  what was  said in Gounder's case by this
Court and what has been said by the learned Chief Justice in
the Gujarat case. But in the application of the principle to
the facts of the two aggregate sums of money it was possible
to take	 a different  view. In	relation to the gifts of Rs.
1,20,000 it  was possible  to take a view that it was a part
and parcel of the same transac-
537
tion namely  the receipt  of the money by the donees by gift
and their investing the same in the partnership firm. So was
it possible in regard to the sum of Rs. 1,99,500. However, a
different view	was taken  by the  High Court.	But  in	 the
instant case  it is clear that the ratio of the decisions of
this Court  referred to above is squarely applicable and the
Tribunal as well as the High Court was right in holding that
no estate  duty could  be charged in respect of the two sums
of money viz. Rs. 1,00,000 and Rs. 50,000.
     Similarly	in   the  application	of  the	 ratio	some
difference of  opinion will appear to have been expressed by
the High  Courts in the case of Controller of Estate Duty v.
Chaman Lal  Bery(1); Controller	 of Estate  Duty  v.  B.  V.
Kapadia(2), Controller of Estate Duty, Madras v. S. R. Beevi
Rahman(3) and  Controller of  Estate Duty,  Madras v.  V. S.
Suryanarayanan(4). It  is not necessary for us to enter into
the fine distinction drawn by the High Courts in each of the
cases referred	to above.  But we want to emphasise that the
principles of  law  laid  down	by  this  Court	 in  several
decisions which	 we have reviewed in this judgment with some
further clarification  and elucidation	should be  carefully
and broadly  applied to the facts of each case without doing
too much  of dichotomy and hair splitting of facts so as not
to easily  apply or  not  to  apply  the  provision  of	 law
contained in Section 10 of the Act.
     The facts	of Civil  Appeal 2528  of 1972	are that  in
April or  May, 1958,  Jiashi Ram, the deceased made gifts of
Rs. 20,000  each in  favour of his son Jagdish Chand and his
four daughters-in-law. The donees invested the entire sum of
Rs. 1,00,000  gifted to them in the firm in which Jaishi Ram
was a  partner. Jaishi	Ram died  on October  23,  1961.  It
appears these  donees were not partners in the firm nor were
they taken  as such  after the	gifts  were  made  in  their
favour. Yet, applying the same principle of law the Tribunal
as well	 as the	 High Court  has held  that the	 accountable
person is  not liable  to pay  estate duty on the sum of Rs.
1,00,000. Here	the donees  remained creditors	and the sums
gifted were  already being  utilised by	 the firm.  The same
remained  being	  utilised.  Squarely	Munro's	  ratio	  is
applicable. In	our opinion,  this case	 is  on	 a  stronger
footing than  that of  Civil Appeal  2527,  as	was  rightly
conceded by  Mr. S. T. Desai also. We, therefore, uphold the
decision of the High Court in this appeal also.
538
     For the  reasons stated  above, both  the	appeals	 are
dismissed. Civil  Appeal 2528  is dismissed  with costs	 but
there will  be no  order as to costs in Civil Appeal 2527 of
1972 as the hearing of this appeal proceeded ex-parte.
P.B.R.					  Appeals dismissed.
539




