

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Sushil Chowdhary And Ors vs State Of Bihar on 6 September, 1979Equivalent citations: 1980 AIR 1716, 1980 SCR  (1) 587
Author: V Krishnaiyer
Bench: Krishnaiyer, V.R.
           PETITIONER:
SUSHIL CHOWDHARY AND ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF BIHAR

DATE OF JUDGMENT06/09/1979

BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
SHINGAL, P.N.

CITATION:
 1980 AIR 1716		  1980 SCR  (1) 587
 1979 SCC  (4) 488


ACT:
     Sentencing	 process-Sentence   for	 aged	persons	 and
youthful offenders-Sections  354(3), 360  and 365 Crl. P.C.,
1973.



HEADNOTE:
     Dismissing the appeal by special leave, the Court
^
     HELD: 1.  Having due  regard to  the age of the accused
Munni Marandi  and to  the  absence  of	 any  overt  act,  a
sentence of  two years	R.I. would,  in the circumstances of
his case  meet the  ends of  justice for the offence u/s 149
read with Section 326 I.P.C. [587 G-H]
     2. Absence	 of legislation	 cannot be  made up  for  by
judicial legislation, Babua Marandi was aged 15 years at the
time of	 the offence  and there is no Children Act in Bihar.
Though the conviction or sentence cannot be interfered with,
in the hapless circumstances of the case and in the helpless
situation of  legislative vacuum  all that this Court can do
is to  direct that Babua Marandi be placed either in an open
prison or in a model prison or any other prison available in
the State  where young	offenders are  kept apart  from	 the
adult offenders. The special directions for doing so is that
adolescents  should  be	 separated  from  adults  in  prison
campuses for obvious reasons. [588C-E]



JUDGMENT:
     CRIMINAL APPELLATE	 JURISDICTION: Criminal	 Appeal	 No.
483 of 1979.
     Appeal by	Special Leave  from the	 Judgment and  Order
dated 22-3-1979	 of the	 Patna High Court in Crl. A. No. 356
and 407/73.
     B. P. Singh and L. R. Singh for the Appellants.
     S. N. Jha and U. P. Singh for the Respondent.
     The Order of the Court was delivered by
     KRISHNA  IYER,  J.	 We  have  heard  the  arguments  of
appellants' counsel with specific reference to Munni Marandi
and Babua  Marandi the	appellants herein. We have also read
through the evidence relating to these accused persons aided
by counsel  for the  State. The	 role  attributed  to  Munni
Marandi is  that he  was a  member of the crowd which chased
the deceased  and in that sense was liable under Section 149
read with  326 I.P.C. We cannot fault the High Court for the
conviction rendered, but having due regard to the age of the
accused and  to the absence of any overt act on his part, we
consider that  a sentence  of two  years' R.I.	will, in the
circumstances of this case, meet the ends of justice.
588
     Babua Marandi, a boy aged 15, was also in the crowd. In
the excited  chase of  the deceased,  this boy also followed
and  when  the	actual	sword  thrust  was  made  by  Ranjit
Chaudhry, this	boy held  the deceased.	 In this  sense, his
part is	 different from	 that of  Munni Marandi. We are not,
therefore, disposed  to interfere with his conviction or the
sentence. Nevertheless,	 it is	important to  remember	that
Babua Marandi  was aged	 15 years at time of the offence. It
is regrettable-and this Court has pointed this out more than
once-that there	 is no	Children Act  in Bihar,	 and in this
International Year  of the  Child we  have to emphasize that
the Legislature	 is expected  to do its duty by the children
of Bihar  by considering  the passing  of a measure like the
Children Act  which long  ago had  been	 circulated  by	 the
Central Government  and which exists in some other states in
the country.  Be that  as it may, we are unable to deal with
Babua Marandi  as a child for the simple reason that absence
of  legislation	  cannot  be   made  up	  for  by   Judicial
legislation.  All   that  we   can  do,	  in   the   hapless
circumstances of  the case  and in the helpless situation of
legislative vacuum,  is to  direct  that  Babua	 Marandi  be
placed either  in an open prison or in a model prison or any
other prison  available in  the State  where young offenders
are kept  apart from the adult offenders. The special reason
which induces  us to make this direction is that, as is well
known, adolescents should be separated from adults in prison
campuses. The  vices are  obvious and  we, therefore, direct
accordingly.
V.D.K.					   Appeal dismissed.
589




