

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
C. B. Muthamma vs Union Of India & Ors on 17 September, 1979Equivalent citations: 1979 AIR 1868, 1980 SCR  (1) 668
Author: V Krishnaiyer
Bench: Krishnaiyer, V.R.
           PETITIONER:
C. B. MUTHAMMA

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
UNION OF INDIA & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT17/09/1979

BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
SHINGAL, P.N.

CITATION:
 1979 AIR 1868		  1980 SCR  (1) 668
 1979 SCC  (4) 260
 CITATOR INFO :
 R	    1981 SC1829	 (67)


ACT:
     Constitution of India-Articles 14 & 16-Scope of.



HEADNOTE:
     The petitioner is a senior member of the Indian Foreign
Service and  complains that she had been denied promotion to
Grade I	 of the	 Indian Foreign	 Service on the grounds that
(i)  there   is	 a   long  standing   practice	of   hostile
discrimination against women (ii) had to give an undertaking
at the	time of joining the foreign service that if she were
to get	married, she would resign from the service (iii) had
to face	 the consequences of being a woman and thus suffered
discrimination and  (iv)  the  members	of  the	 appointment
committee of  the Union	 cabinet and  respondent No.  2	 are
basically  prejudiced	against	 women	 as  a	 group.	 The
petitioner has further challenged two rules namely rule 8(2)
of Indian  Foreign Service  (Conduct and  Discipline)  Rules
1961  and   Rule  18(4)	  of  the   Indian  Foreign  Service
(Recruitment, Cadre  Seniority and  Promotion)	Rules  1961,
which in  short states	that a	woman member  of the service
shall obtain  permission in writing of the Government before
marriage and  the woman member may be required to resign any
time after  marriage if the Government is satisfied that her
family and  domestic commitments will hamper her duties as a
member of  the service	and under the second rule no married
woman shall  be entitled  as of right to be appointed to the
service. The petitioner's remaining grievance is that during
the interval of some months between her first evaluation and
the second, some officers junior to her, have gone above her
and her career would be affected.
     Dismissing the petition,
^
     HELD :  That sex prejudice against the Indian womenhood
pervades the  service rules  even a third of a century after
Freedom. There	is some	 basis for the charge of bias in the
rules  and  this  makes	 the  ominous  indifference  of	 the
executive to bring about the banishment of discrimination in
the heritage  of service rules. If high officials lose hopes
of equal  justice under	 the rules,  the legal	lot  of	 the
little Indian,	already priced out of the expensive judicial
market, is  best left  to  guess.  This	 disturbing  thought
induces the  making of	a few  observations  about  the	 two
impugned rules	which  appear  prima  facie,  discriminatory
against the female of the species in public service and have
surprisingly survived  so long, presumably, because servants
of Government  are afraid to challenge unconstitutional rule
making by the Administration. [669 E-H]
     Discrimination against women, is found in Rule 8(2). If
a woman	 member shall  obtain the  permission of  Government
before the marriage, the same risk is run by Government if a
male member contracts a marriage. If the family and domestic
commitments of	a woman	 member of  the service is likely to
come in	 the way of efficient discharge of duties, a similar
situation may  well arise  in the  case of a male member. In
these days  of nuclear	families, intercontinental marriages
and unconventional behaviour, one fails to under-
669
stand, the  naked bias	against the  gentler of the species.
Rule 18(4)  is in  defiance of Art. 16. If a married man has
a right,  a married  woman, other things being equal, stands
on no  worse footing. Freedom is indivisible, so is justice.
That our  founding faith  enshrined in Art. 14 and 16 should
have been  tragically  ignored	vis-a-vis  half	 of  India's
humanity, viz.,	 our  women  is	 a  sad	 reflection  on	 the
distance between Constitution in the book and Law in action.
And if	the Executive  as the surrogate of Parliament, makes
rules in  the  teeth  of  Part	III,  especially  when	high
political  office,  even  diplomatic  assignment,  has	been
filled by women, the inference of die-hard allergy to gender
parity is  inevitable. As  Rule 18(4)  has been	 deleted  in
November, 1973,	 and rule  8(2) is on its way to oblivion as
its  deletion  is  being  gazetted,  there  is	no  need  to
scrutinize or  strike down  these rules. The petitioner has,
after the  institution of this proceeding, been promoted and
where justice  has been	 done, further probe is otiose. [671
B-D, E-G, 672 C]
     The  Court	  directed  the	 respondent  to	 review	 the
petitioner's case  with particular focus on seniority vis-a-
vis those  junior to  her who  have  been  promoted  in	 the
interval of  some months.  It was further impressed upon the
respondent the	need to overhaul all service rules to remove
the stains of sex discrimination, without waiting for ad-hoc
inspiration from Writ Petitions or gender charity. [672 G-H]



JUDGMENT:
     ORIGINAL JURISDICTION : Writ Petition No. 743 of 1979.
     (Under Article 32 of the Constitution.)
     D.	 P.   Singh,  L.  R.  Singh  and  S.  Sahu  for	 the
Petitioner.
     Soli  J.	Sorabjee,  Solicitor  General  and  Miss  A.
Subhashini for the Respondent.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     KRISHNA IYER,J.  This writ petition by Miss Muthamma, a
senior member  of the  Indian Foreign  Service,	 bespeaks  a
story which  makes one	wonder whether	Articles 14  and  16
belong to myth or reality. The credibility of constitutional
mandates shall	not be	shaken	by  governmental  action  or
inaction but  it is  the effect	 of the	 grievance  of	Miss
Muthamma  that	 sex  prejudice	  against  Indian  womanhood
pervades the  service rules  even a third of a century after
Freedom. There	is some	 basis for the charge of bias in the
rules  and  this  makes	 the  ominous  indifference  of	 the
executive to bring about the banishment of discrimination in
the heritage  of service rules. If high officials lose hopes
of equal  justice under	 the rules,  the legal	lot  of	 the
little Indian,	already priced out of the expensive judicial
market, is  best left  to  guess.  This	 disturbing  thought
induces us to make a few observations about the two impugned
rules which  appear prima  facie, discriminatory against the
female	of   the  species   in	public	 service  and	have
surprisingly survived  so long, presumably, because servants
of governments are afraid to challenge unconstitutional rule
making by the Administration.
670
     Miss Muthamma,  the petitioner  complains that  she had
been denied  promotion to  Grade I  of	the  Indian  Foreign
Service illegally and unconstitutionally. She bewailed that,
to quote her own words;
	  "....one  of	the  reasons  for  the	petitioner's
     supersession is  the long	standing practice of hostile
     discrimination  against   women.  Even   at  the	very
     threshold when  the petitioner  qualified for the Union
     Public Services  at the  time  of	her  interview,	 the
     Chairman of  the U.P.S.C.	tried to persuade (dissuade)
     the petitioner  from joining  the Foreign	Service.  On
     subsequent	 occasion   he	 personally   informed	 the
     Petitioner that  he had  used his influence as Chairman
     to give minimum marks in the viva. As the time of entry
     into the  Foreign Service,	 the petitioner	 had also to
     give an undertaking that if she were to get married she
     would resign from the service.
	  That on  numerous occasions  the petitioner had to
     face  the	consequences  of  being	 a  woman  and	thus
     suffered	discrimination	 though	  the	Constitution
     specifically under	 Article 15 prohibits discrimination
     on grounds	 of religion,  race, caste,  sex or place of
     birth and	Article 14  of the Constitution provides the
     principles of equality before law........
	  That members	of the Appointments Committee of the
     Union Cabinet  and the  respondent No.  2 are basically
     prejudiced against women as a group. The Prime Minister
     of India  has been	 reported in  the  Press  as  having
     stated-it will  not be  irrelevant here to mention that
     most of  the women	 who are  in the  service at  senior
     levels are being very systematically selected for posts
     which have	 traditionally	been  assigned	a  very	 low
     priority by the Ministry."
     If	 a   fragment  of   these  assertions	were   true,
unconstitutionality is	writ  large  in	 the  administrative
psyche and  masculine hubris  which is the anathema for part
III haunts  the echelons in the concerned Ministry. If there
be such	 gender injustice  in action, it deserves scrupulous
attention from the summit so as to obliterate such tendency.
     What is  more manifest  as misogynist  in	the  Foreign
Service is  the persistence  of two  rules which  have	been
extracted in  the petition.  Rule 8(2) of the Indian Foreign
Service (Conduct  & Discipline)	 Rules,	 1961,	unblushingly
reads:
	  "Rule 8(2)  : In cases where sub-rule (1) does not
     apply, a  woman member  of the service shall obtain the
     per-
671
     mission  of   the	Government  in	writing	 before	 her
     marriage is solemnized. At any time after the marriage,
     a woman member of the Service may be required to resign
     from service,  if the  Government is satisfied that her
     family and	 domestic commitments  are likely to come in
     the way  of the  due and  efficient  discharge  of	 her
     duties as a member of the service."
     Discrimination    against	   women,    in	   traumatic
transparency, is found in this rule. If a woman member shall
obtain the  permission of government before she marries, the
same risk  is run by government if a male member contracts a
marriage. If  the family and domestic commitments of a woman
member of  the Service	is likely  to come  in	the  way  of
efficient discharge  of duties, a similar situation may well
arise in the case of a male member. In these days of nuclear
families,  inter-continental  marriages	 and  unconventional
behaviour, one	fails to  understand the  naked bias against
the gentler  of the  species. Rule  18 of the Indian Foreign
Service (Recruitment  Cadre, Seniority and Promotion) Rules,
1961, run in the same prejudicial strain:
     "(1)............
     (2).............
     (3).............
     (4)   No married woman shall be entitled as of right to
	  be appointed to the service."
     At the  first blush this rule is in defiance of Article
16. If	a married  man has  a right,  a married woman, other
things	being  equal,  stands  on  no  worse  footing.	This
misogynous posture is a hangover of the masculine culture of
manacling the  weaker sex  forgetting how  our struggle	 for
national freedom was also a battle against woman's thraldom.
Freedom is  indivisible, so  is Justice.  That our  founding
faith enshrined	 in Articles  14 and  16  should  have	been
tragically ignored vis-a-vis half of India's humanity, viz.,
our women,  is a  sad reflection  on  the  distance  between
Constitution in	 the book  and Law  in Action.	And  if	 the
Executive as the surrogate of Parliament, makes rules in the
teeth of  Part III,  especially when  high political office,
even diplomatic	 assignment has	 been filled  by women,	 the
inference  of	die-hard  allergy   to	gender	 parity	  is
inevitable.
     We do  not mean  to universalise  or dogmatise that men
and women  are equal  in all  occupations and all situations
and  do	 not  exclude  the  need  to  pragmatise  where	 the
requirements of	 particular employment, the sensitivities of
sex or the peculiarities of societal sectors or the
672
handicaps of  either sex  may compel  selectivity. But	save
where the  differentiation  is	demonstrable,  the  rule  of
equality must  govern. This creed of our Constitution has at
last told  on our  governmental	 mentation,  perhaps  partly
pressured by the pendency of this very writ petition. In the
counter affidavit, it is stated that Rule 18(4) (referred to
earlier)  has  been  deleted  on  November  12,	 1973.	And,
likewise, the Central Government's affidavit avers that Rule
8(2) is	 on its	 way to oblivion since its deletion is being
gazetted. Better  late than  never.  At	 any  rate,  we	 are
relieved of  the need  to scrutinise  or strike	 down  these
rules.
     The petitioner  has,  after  the  institution  of	this
proceeding, been  promoted. Is	it a  case of  post hoc ergo
propter hoc  ? Where justice has been done, further probe is
otiose. The  Central Government	 states	 that  although	 the
petitioner was	not found  meritorious enough  for promotion
some months ago, she has been found to be good now, has been
upgraded and  appointed as Ambassador of India to the Hague,
for what  it is	 worth. Her surviving grievance is only one.
During	the  interval  of  some	 months	 between  her  first
evaluation and	the second, some officers junior to her have
gone above  her. In  the rat  race of  Indian official life,
seniority appears  to be  acquiring a  religious  reverence.
Since the  career  ahead  of  the  petitioner  may  well  be
affected by  the factum	 of prior  birth into Grade I of the
Service,  her  grievance  turning  on  seniority  cannot  be
brushed aside. Her case, with particular focus on seniority,
deserves review	 vis-a-vis those junior to her who have been
promoted in  the interval  of  some  months.  The  sense  of
injustice rankles  and should  be obliterated  so that every
servant in  strategic position	gives of  his or her best to
the country.  We have  had the	advantage of the presence of
the learned  Solicitor-General, appearing  for the  Union of
India. With  characteristic fairness  he has  persuaded	 his
client to  agree to  what we regard as a just gesture, viz.,
that the  Respondent-Union of  India will shortly review the
seniority  of	the  petitioner,   her	merit	having	been
discovered and	her seniority  to Grade II being recognised.
We direct accordingly.
     Subject to	 what we have said above, we do not think it
necessary to examine the averments of mala fides made in the
petition. What	we do wish to impress upon Government is the
need to	 overhaul all  Service Rules  to remove the stain of
sex discrimination,  without waiting  for ad hoc inspiration
from writ petitions or gender charity.
     We dismiss the petition but not the problem.
N.K.A.					 Petition dismissed.
673




