

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Controller Of Estate Duty, ... vs Umesh Rudra on 15 January, 1979           PETITIONER:
CONTROLLER OF ESTATE DUTY, KARNATAKA, BANGALORE

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
UMESH RUDRA

DATE OF JUDGMENT15/01/1979

BENCH:


ACT:
     Estate Duty  Act, 1953,  S. 10, enjoyment to the entire
exclusion of the donor, applicability when husband is donor.



HEADNOTE:
     The deceased  gifted his  residential porperty  to	 his
wife, but  continued to	 live there  with her. On his death,
while calculating  the estate  duty, the  appellant included
the value  of the  residential property,  in  the  principal
value of  the  estate,	on  the	 ground	 that  the  deceased
continued to  reside with  the wife,  even after  the  gift.
Upholding the  High  Court's  judgment,	 and  rejecting	 the
special leave petition, the Court
^
     HELD : Section 10 cannot be construed in a manner which
would require  the husband  who has gifted residential house
to the	wife, to  live separately  from her.  When the	wife
obtains possession  of the house and remains in enjoyment of
it, it	cannot be said that the husband who resides with the
wife, is, on that account, in possession or enjoyment of the
house so as to attract the applicability of Section 10. [952
B-D]
     Mrs. Shamsum Nehar Mansur v. Controller of Estate Duty,
West Bengal  71 ITR  301 : Sunil Roy v. Controller of Estate
Duty,  Calcutta,  77  ITR  667;	 Mohammad  Bhai	 &  Anr.  v.
Controller of  Estate Duty, A.P., 69 ITR 770; Kamla Pandalai
v. Controller of Estate Duty, 105 ITR 531; approved.
     Bibi Ahmedi  Begum v.  Controller of Estate Duty, U.P.,
83 ITR 303, overruled.



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION :  Special Leave Petition
(Civil) No. 6331/78.
     From  the	Judgment  and  Order  dated  1-6-78  of	 the
Karnataka High Court at Bangalore in T.R.C. No. 1/75
     R.	 N.   Sachthey	and   Miss  A.	 Subhashni  for	 the
Petitioner.
     The Order of the Court was delivered by
     BHAGWATI, J.  This petition for special leave to appeal
against an  order of  the High	Court of  Karnataka raises a
question of  interpretation of section 10 of the Estate Duty
Act, 1953.  The deceased  made a  gift	of  his	 residential
property to his wife on 27th November, 1957 and on his death
which occurred	on 2nd	August,	 1963,	the  question  arose
whether the  value of the residential property was liable to
be included  in the principal value of the estate passing on
the death  of the deceased under section 10. The argument of
the Revenue  was that  even  after  the	 gift  the  deceased
continued to reside with the wife and, therefore, it
952
could not  be said  that the  wife retained  possession	 and
enjoyment  of	the  residential   property  to	 the  entire
exclusion  of	the  deceased	and  hence  section  10	 was
attracted. Now	there can  be no  doubt	 that  on  a  proper
interpretation	of   section  10,   the	 donee	must  retain
possession and	enjoyment of  the  property  gifted  to	 the
entire exclusion  of  the  donor,  in  order  to  repel	 the
applicability of  that section. But we do not see how in the
present case  it can  at all  be said  that the wife did not
retain possession  and enjoyment of the residential house to
the exclusion  of the  deceased, merely because the deceased
in his	capacity as  husband continued	to reside  with	 the
wife. Section  10 cannot  possibly be  construed in a manner
which would  require the  husband who has gifted residential
house to  the wife  to live separately from her, if he wants
to escape  from	 the  mischief	of  that  section.  Such  an
interpretation would  subvert family  life and	social order
and would  be contrary	to morality and good sense. When the
residential house  is gifted  to the  wife and	she  obtains
possession and remains in enjoyment of it, it cannot be said
that the  husband who  resides with  the wife, as in a happy
family life  every husband  would be  expected to do, is, on
that account,  in possession  of the residential house or in
enjoyment of  it. It  is the  wife who	is in possession and
enjoyment of  the residential  house  and  the	husband,  by
reason of  the marital	ties, continues	 to reside  with the
wife. We  do not  think that  section 10  would	 at  all  be
attracted in such a case.
     We find  that this	 view has been taken by the Calcutta
High Court  in Mrs.  Shamsum Nehar  Mansur v.  Controller of
Estate Duty,  West Bengal(1)  and Sunil Roy v. Controller of
Estate Duty,  Calcutta(2), the	Andhra Pradesh High Court in
Mohammed Bhai  and another  v. Controller of Estate Duty,(3)
the Madras  High Court	in Kamla  Pandalai v.  Controller of
Estate Duty,(4) and the Karnataka High Court in the judgment
under appeal  and it  commends itself  to us.  We think that
theise High  Courts rightly refused to apply section 10 to a
case like  the present	where the  husband  has	 gifted	 the
residential house  to the  wife and  thereafter continued to
reside with  the wife in the residential house. The contrary
view taken  by the Allahabad High Court in Bibi Ahmedi Begum
v. Controller  of Estate  Duty, U.P.  (5) must be held to be
erroneous.
     We accordingly reject the special leave petition.
M. R.					 Petition dismissed.
953




