

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Lingari Obulamma vs L. Venkata Reddy & Ors on 19 January, 1979Equivalent citations: 1979 AIR  848, 1979 SCR  (2)1019
Author: S M Fazalali
Bench: Fazalali, Syed Murtaza
           PETITIONER:
LINGARI OBULAMMA

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
L. VENKATA REDDY & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT19/01/1979

BENCH:
FAZALALI, SYED MURTAZA
BENCH:
FAZALALI, SYED MURTAZA
KOSHAL, A.D.

CITATION:
 1979 AIR  848		  1979 SCR  (2)1019
 1979 SCC  (3)	80


ACT:
     Penal Code-S.  494-Scope of-Essential  conditions to be
satisfied for application of the section.



HEADNOTE:
     The appellant  was the  husband of	 respondent  No.  1.
Relations between  the husband and wife having been strained
for some  years they  lived  separately.  On  the  husband's
complaint that	his wife  had married  another person during
the subsistence	 of their  marriage, she  and accused  no. 4
were convicted under s. 494 IPC.
     Allowing the  wife's revision  petition the  High Court
held the marriage to be void on the ground that there was no
evidence to  prove that the essential ceremonies required to
be performed  in a  Hindu marriage,  namely Dutta  Homa	 and
Saptapadi had been performed.
     In appeal	to this	 Court the  husband  contended	that
under the  custom followed  by the  community to  which	 the
parties belonged  Saptapadi was not an essential requirement
to constitute  a valid marriage but that tying a yarn thread
round  the   bride's  neck  at	the  time  of  marriage	 was
sufficient to  make a  valid marriage  and this	 having been
done, the  second marriage was valid and the wife was guilty
of the offence under s. 494 IPC.
     Dismissing the appeal.
^
     HELD: The	prosecution failed  to prove that the second
marriage was a valid marriage and, therefore, the High Court
was justified in acquitting the respondents. [1022 F]
     Before a  conviction can  be recorded  under s. 494 IPC
the following ingredients must be sartisfied :-
	  (1)	that the complainant had been married to the
	       accused;
	  (2)  that the accused contracted a second marriage
	       while   the    first   marriage	 was   still
	       subsisting; and
	  (3)  that  both   the	 marriages  were  valid	 and
	       strictly	 according   to	 law  governing	 the
	       parties. [1022 B]
In the instant case there was no evidence to show that there
was any	 custom among  the parties  out weighing the written
text of law. Secondly, the husband had not clearly mentioned
that the  parties were	governed by  custom in derogation of
Hindu Law.  The priest	who performed the marriage had shown
complete ignorance  as to  whether or  not the	parties were
governed   by	 custom.   The	 witness   was,	  therefore,
incompetent,to depose  about the  existence of any custom in
the family  of the  parties. When the priest said that there
was no custom of sacred fire and Saptapadi what he meant was
that in	 the second  marriage these  two ceremonies  had not
been performed. [1022 C-D & 1021 G-H]
1020
In re: Dolgonti Raghava Reddy & Anr., AIR 1968 (AP) 117 held
inapplicable.



JUDGMENT:
     CRIMINAL APPELLATE	 JURISDICTION :	 Criminal Appeal No.
339 of 1975.
     Appeal by	Special Leave  from the	 Judgment and  Order
dated 19-3-1975 of the Andhra Pradesh High Court in Criminal
Revision Case  No. 16/74  (Criminal  Revision  Petition	 No.
12/74).
     P.	 Parmeshwara   Rao,  T.	  V.  S.  N.  Chari  and  R.
Nagarathnam for the Appellant.
     A. V. V. Nair for the Respondent.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     FAZAL ALI,	 J. This  appeal by  special leave  has been
filed by  the complainant  against the	order of  the Andhra
Pradesh High  Court acquitting the respondents, who had been
convicted by  the trial	 court Magistrate  and the  Sessions
Judge under Section 494 I. P. C. and sentenced to six months
rigorous imprisonment and a fine of Rs. 100/- as modified by
the Sessions Judge.
     The  appellant   had  filed  a  complaint	against	 the
respondent No.	1 on  the ground that he was her husband and
while the  first marriage was subsisting he had contracted a
second marriage and was, therefore, guilty of the offence of
bigamy as  enshrined in Section 494 of I. P. C. According to
the prosecution	 the first marriage of respondent No. 1 with
appellant took	place on 22-4-68. After about 3 years of the
first marriage	the relations  between the  husband and wife
became	strained  and  they  separated,	 but  there  was  no
divorce. On  1-4-1972 the  respondent No.  1 married accused
No. 4  and the	other accused  who  were  relations  of	 the
respondent participated	 in the	 marriage. On  knowing	this
fact the  appellant filed  a complaint	on 26-4-1972  on the
basis  of   which  the	 respondents  were   prosecuted	 and
ultimately convicted  under Section 494 of I. P. C. The case
went up	 in revision  to the  High Court  which accepted the
revision and  acquitted the accused on the ground that there
was no	proof of  a valid  marriage having  been  contracted
between accused	 No. 4 and accused No. 1. Against this order
the appellant  filed a	petition for special leave and after
obtaining special  leave, the  appeal has been placed before
us for hearing.
     The short	point involved	in  this  appeal  is  as  to
whether or  not the second marriage contracted by respondent
No. 1(A-1)  with respondent  No. 4(A-4)	 was a legally valid
marriage. The  High Court  pointed out	that under the Hindu
Law, two essential ceremonies of
1021
a valid	 marriage are  Datta Homa  and Saptapadi i.e. taking
seven steps  around the	 sacred fire.  The High	 Court found
that there  was absolutely  no evidence to prove that any of
these two  essential ceremonies	 had  been  performed,	and,
therefore, the	marriage was void in the eye of law. In this
view of	 the matter  the High Court held that the conviction
under Section 494 I. P. C. could not be sustained.
     In support of the appeal Mr. Rao has submitted that the
High Court  has taken a wrong view of law and has overlooked
the fact  that in  the instant case, the parties belonged to
the Reddy  Community and  were therefore  governed by custom
and under  the custom  the two	ceremonies mentioned  by the
High Court  were not  necessary at all to constitute a valid
marriage. The  other ceremonies	 which were  necessary under
the custom  had been performed according to Purohit (P.W.1).
Unfortunately, however,	 in the	 state of  evidence  in	 the
present case it is impossible for us to hold that the second
marriage was a valid one. In the first place it has not been
clearly mentioned in the complaint as to whether the parties
were  governed	 by  custom  in	 derogation  of	 Hindu	Law.
Secondly, P.W. 1 stated thus:-
	  "Among Kapus,	 according  to	their  customs	each
     community will  perform the  marriage. Some  Kapus have
     only 'Yarn	 Thread' instead of Mangala Sutram. I do not
     know what is the custom (Acharam) of the accused. There
     was no  custom of	putting sacred	fire. There  was  no
     'Agni Gundam'  (Sacred fire  and no going round 7 times
     by the  bride and	bridegroom). I	do not	know whether
     that is true of a secret marriage".
     It would  appear from the aforesaid statement of P.W. 1
that he had clearly stated that he does not know what is the
custom of  the accused.	 Having shown  complete ignorance of
the fact  as to	 whether or  not the accused was governed by
custom the witness goes on to state that there was no custom
of sacred  fire and Saptapadi. What the witness really means
is that	 in the	 second marriage  which	 was  contracted  by
respondent No. 1, these two ceremonies were not performed by
him.  Mr.  Rao,	 however,  vehemently  contended  that	this
witness proves	that in	 the Reddy  Community the  custom of
Saptapadi was not prevalent and it was sufficient to put the
'Yarn Thread'  instead of Mangal Sutra'. In our opinion when
witness has  frankly admitted  that he	does  not  know	 the
custom of the accused he was incompetent to depose about the
existence of any custom in the family
1022
of the	accused. It is well settled that before a conviction
can be	recorded under section 494 the following ingredients
must be proved:-
	  (1)  That the	 complainant had been married to the
	       accused;
	  (2)  That the accused contracted a second marriage
	       while   the    first   marriage	 was   still
	       subsisting;
	  (3)  That  both   the	 marriages  were  valid	 and
	       strictly	 according   to	 law  governing	 the
	       parties.
     In the  instant case there was no evidence to show that
there was  any custom  amongst the  Reddys which, outweighed
the written  text of  law. The	evidence of P. W. 1, clearly
falls short  of the  standard to  prove this  fact. Mr. Rao,
however, strongly relied on a decision of the Andhra Pradesh
High Court  in some  other case to show that among the Reddy
Community of  Telangana area  the two  ceremonies  mentioned
above were  not necessary.  In the  first place the decision
referred to  above in the case of re: Dolgonti Raghava Reddy
and Another(1) clearly shows that the Court in that case was
concerned only	with the Reddy Community of Telangana alone.
The trial  court has pointed out in its judgment that so far
as accused  is concerned  he belongs  to the Reddy Community
not of	Telangana area,	 but that  of Rayalaseema  area.  In
these circumstances the Judgment of the High Court cannot be
of any avail to the appellant. Moreover, as the existence of
the custom was neither mentioned in the complaint nor proved
in the evidence it would be difficult for this Court to rely
on the	decision of  the High  Court which  was based on the
evidence, facts	 and circumstances of the case before it. In
these circumstances  we agree  with the	 High Court that the
prosecution had	 failed to  prove that	the second  marriage
contracted by  respondent No.  1 with respondent No. 4 was a
valid marriage	and, therefore,	 the High  Court  was  fully
justified in  acquitting  the  respondents.  The  appeal  is
without any substance and is accordingly dismissed.
     P.B.R.				   Appeal dismissed.
1023




