

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Mohd. Iqbal, Ahmad vs State Of Andhra Pradesh on 18 January, 1979Equivalent citations: 1979 AIR  677, 1979 SCR  (2)1007
Author: S M Fazalali
Bench: Fazalali, Syed Murtaza
           PETITIONER:
MOHD. IQBAL, AHMAD

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF ANDHRA PRADESH

DATE OF JUDGMENT18/01/1979

BENCH:
FAZALALI, SYED MURTAZA
BENCH:
FAZALALI, SYED MURTAZA
KOSHAL, A.D.

CITATION:
 1979 AIR  677		  1979 SCR  (2)1007
 1979 SCC  (4) 172
 CITATOR INFO :
 R	    1984 SC 684	 (19,23)
 F	    1991 SC 279	 (6)


ACT:
     Prevention of  Corruption	Act,s.	5(2)  read  with  s.
5(1)(d)-Case instituties     without proper  sanction-Effect
of-Proof  of   valid  sanction-How   could  be	established-
Sanction-Its importance	 in prosecutions-Facts	coming	into
existence subsequently-If could be relevant-Presumption that
sanctioning  authority	 was  satisfied	  that	the  accused
received bribe-When  could  arise-If  prosecution  could  be
given  a  chance  at  appellate	 stage	to  prove  that	 the
sanctioning authority had applied its mind before giving the
sanction.



HEADNOTE:
     The appellant  who was charged with an offence under s.
5(2) read with s.5(1)(d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act
was acquitted  by the  Special Judge.  But the High Court on
appeal by  the State,  reversed the  judgment of  he Special
Judge and convicted him.
     In appeal	to this	 Court it was contended on behalf of
the appellant  that there  was no  evidence to	show on what
materials the  sanctioning authority applied its mind before
granting the  sanction under  s.6 of  the  Act.	 The  entire
proceedings are void ab initio.
     Allowing the appeal.
^
     HELD: 1  (a). The	prosecution  of	 the  appellant	 was
without valid  sanction and,  therefore, cognizance taken by
the Special Judge was without jurisdiction. [1011 G]
     (b) Any  case instituted  without proper  sanction must
fail  because	this  being   a	 manifest   defect  in	 the
prosecution, the  entire proceedings  are rendered  void  ab
initio. It  is incumbent  on the prosecution to prove that a
valid sanction had been granted by the sanctioning authority
after it  was satisfied	 that  a  case	had  been  made	 out
constituting the  offence. This	 should be done in two ways:
either (i)  by producing  the original sanction which itself
contains the  facts constituting the offence and the grounds
of sutisfaction or (ii) by adducing evidence aliunde showing
the facts  placed before  the authority and the satisfaction
arrived at by it. [1010 B-D]
     In the  present case  no  evidence,  either  primay  or
secondary, had	been led  to prove  the contents of the note
placed	before	 the  sanctioning  authority  nor  were	 the
witnesses examined  in a  position to  state the contents of
the note.
     2(a). The	grant of  sanction is  not an idle formality
but a  solemn and sacrosanct act which affords protection to
government servanats against frivolous prosecutions and must
therefore be  strictly complied	 with before any prosecution
could be launched against public servants. [1010G]
     (b) There is no force in the argument of the State that
the Court  should presume the facts on the basis of evidence
given by one of the witnesses and the order implementing the
sanction mentioning those facts. What the Court
1008
has to	see is	whether or  not the sanctioning authority at
the time  of giving  the sanction  was aware  of  the  facts
constituting the  offence and applied its mind for the same.
Any  subsequent	  fact	coming	 into  existence  after	 the
resolution had been passed is wholly irrelevant. [1010 F]
     (c) There is equally no force in the State's contention
that even  if no  facts were  mentioned in the resolution it
must  be   presumed  that   the	 sanctioning  authority	 was
satisfied that the accused had received a bribe. There is no
question of  a presumption being available .o the sactioning
authority because  at that  stage the occasion for drawing a
presumption never  arises since	 there is  no  case  in	 the
Court. [1011 B]
     (d) The  presumption does	not arise  automatically but
only on proof of certain circumstances that is to say, where
it is  proved by  evidence in  Court that  the money said to
have been  paid to  the accused	 was actually recovered from
his possession.	 It is	only then that the Court may presume
the amount  received  would  be	 deemed	 to  be	 an  illegal
gratification. The  question of	 sanction arises  before the
proceedings come  to the Court and the question of drawing a
presumption does not arise at this stage. [1011 C]
     (e) The prosecution cannot be given a chance to produce
any material  before the  court at  the appellate  stage  to
satisfy that the sanctioninf authority	had duly applied its
mind before  giving the	 sanction. The	prosecution had been
afforded a  full and complete opportunity at the trial stage
to produce  whatever material  it liked and it had chosen to
examine two  witnesses; but for reasons best known to it, it
did not	 produce the note which formed the subject matter of
resolution of the sanctioning authority. [1011 E]
     (f) In  a criminal case this Court would not ordinarily
direct fresh  evidence to fill up a lacuna deliberately left
by the	prosecution. The  liberty  of  the  subject  was  in
jeopardy and  it cannot	 be allowed to put in jeopardy again
at the	instance of the prosecution which failed to avail of
the opportunity afforded to it. [1011 J]



JUDGMENT:
     CRIMINAL APPELLATE	 JURISDICTION: Criminal	 Appeal	 No.
194 of 1973.
     Appeal by	Special Leave  from the	 Judgment and  Order
dated 3-4-1973	of the Andhra Pradesh High Court in Criminal
Appeal No. 703/71.
     .A. N. Mulla and A. Subba Rao for the Appellant.
     G. Narayana Rao for the Respondent.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     FAZAL ALL,	 J.-In this  appeal  by	 special  leave	 the
appellant has  been convicted  under section  161 I.P.C. and
section 5(2)  read with section 5(1)(d) of the Prevention of
Corruption Act	and sentenced  to rigorous  imprisonment for
one year and a fine of Rs. 250/- on each count.
1009
     The appellant  had been  convicted by Special Judge but
on appeal  by the  State to  the High  Court the  High Court
reversed  the	judgment  of  acquittal	 and  convicted	 the
appellant as  indicated above.	According to the prosecution
the appellant  is said to have struck a bargain for taking a
bribe of  Rs. 125/-  which he  received on the 15th of July,
1968 in	 the presence  of P.Ws.	 1 and	3. On  receiving the
signal the  raiding party appeared on the scene and the hand
of the	accused was dipped in water containing phenopthelien
solution which showed that he touched the notes. The defence
of the	appellant was  that he	never demanded any bribe and
that the  notes were  thrust into  his	pocket.	 It  is	 not
necessary for us to dwell on the merits of the case because,
in our	opinion, the appeal must succeed on a short point of
law, raised  by Mr.  A. N.  Mulla, learned  counsel for	 the
appellant. It  was argued  that the sanction under section 6
of the	Prevention of  Corruption Act  produced in this case
does not  reveal the  facts constituting  the  offence	and,
therefore, there  is no	 evidence to  show on what materials
the sanctioning	 authority applied  its mind and granted the
sanction. The Resolution of the Standing Committee  granting
the sanction  is Exh.  P-16 and is dated 31-3-1969, and runs
as follows:
	  "As per  note	 of  the  Commissioner,	 M.C.H.	 the
     Standing Committee	 unanimously  accords  sanction	 for
     prosecution of  Sri Mohd.	Iqbal Ahmed (in the scale of
     110-180)  Section	Officer	 of  Town  Planning  Section
     (Under  suspensions)  in  a  competent  Court  for	 the
     offence mentioned	in  the	 note  of  the	Commissioner
     M.C.H.,  dated   18-1-1969	 so   as   to	enable	 the
     Commissioner to  sign the prosecution order and send it
     to the  Director,	Anti-Corruption	 Bureau	 for  taking
     further action at the earliest".
     A	perusal	  of  the   Resolution	of  the	 Sanctioning
Authority clearly  shows that no facts on the basis of which
the prosecution	 was to	 be sanctioned against the appellant
are mentioned in the sanction nor does this document contain
any ground  on which  the satisfaction	of  the	 Sanctioning
Authority was  based and  its mind  applied.  This  document
merely mentions	 that the  sanction has	 been given  on	 the
basis of  a note  of the Commissioner, Municipal Corporation
which appears  to have	been placed before the Committee. It
is obvious,  therefore, that  this note,  if any,  must have
come into existence either on 31-3-1969 or at any date prior
to  this.  The	prosecution  could  have  proved  the  facts
constituting the  offence which	 were	 placed	 before	 the
Sanctioning Authority by producing the note at
1010
the trial.  But no  such  thing	 has  been  done.  What	 the
prosecution did	 was merely to examine two witnesses P.Ws. 2
and 7.	P.W. 2	has  produced  the  order  implementing	 the
Resolution of the Sanction ing Authority which is Exhibit P-
10 and	is dated  21st April, 1969, that is to say after the
sanction was  given. This  document no	doubt  contains	 the
facts constituting  the offence	 but that does not solve the
legal issues that arise in this case. It is incumbent on the
prosecution to	prove that a valid sanction has been granted
by the	Sanctioning Authority  after it was satisfied that a
case  for  sanction  has  been	made  out  constituting	 the
offence. This  should be  done in  two ways;  either (1)  by
producing the  original sanction  which itself	contains the
facts  constituting   the  offence   and  the	grounds	  of
satisfaction and  (2) by  adducing evidence  aliunde to show
that the  facts placed	before the Sanctioning Authority and
the satisfaction  arrived at  by it. It is well settled that
any case  instituted without  a proper	sanction  must	fail
because this being a manifest difficulty in the prosecution,
the entire  proceedings are  rendered void ab initio. In the
instant case  no evidence  has been  led either	 primary  or
secondary to  prove as to what were the contents of the note
mentioned in  Exhibit  P-16  which  was	 placed	 before	 the
Sanctioning Authority.	The evidence  of P.W. 2 or P.W. 7 is
wholly irrelevant because they were not in a position to say
as to  what were  the contents	of the note which formed the
subject matter	of the sanction by the Standing Committee of
the Corporation.  The note  referred to	 above was  the only
primary evidence for this purpose. Mr. Rao vehemently argued
that although the Resolution, Exh. P-16 does not mention the
facts, the  Court should  presume the  facts on the basis of
the evidence  given by	P.W. 2	and the	 order	implementing
sanction which mentions these facts. This argument is wholly
untenable because  what the  Court has	to see is whether or
not the Sanctioning Authority at the time of giving sanction
was aware  of the facts constituting the offence and applied
its mind for the same and any subsequent fact which may come
into existence	after the  resolution granting	sanction has
been passed,  is wholly irrelevant. The grant of sanction is
not an	idle formality	or an  acrimonious  exercise  but  a
solemn	and  sacrosanct	 act  which  affords  protection  to
government servants  against frivolous prosecutions and must
therefore be  strictly complied	 with before any prosecution
can be launched against the public servant concerned.
     It was  next contended  by Mr.  Rao that in view of the
presumption which  is to  be drawn  under section  4 of	 the
Prevention  of	 Corruption  Act,  even	 if,  no  facts	 are
mentioned in the Resolution of
1011
the Sanctioning	 Authority it  must  be	 presumed  that	 the
Sanctioning Authority  was satisfied  that  the	 prosecution
against the appellant should be launched on the basis of the
presumpion that	 the accused  had received a bribe. With due
respects to  the learned  counsel, this argument seems to be
wholly mis-conceived.  In  the	first  place,  there  is  no
question  of   the  presumption	  being	 available   to	 the
Sanctioning Authority because at that stage the occasion for
drawing a presumption never arises since there is no case in
the  Court.   Secondly,	 the   presumption  does  not  arise
automatically but  only on  proof of  certain circumstances,
that is	 to say, where it is proved by evidence in the Court
that the  money said  to have  been paid  to the accused was
actually recovered from his possession. It is only then that
the Court may presume the amount received would be deemed to
be an  illegal gratification.  So far  as  the	question  of
sanction is  concerned this  arises before  the	 proceedings
come  to   the	Court	and  the  question  of	drawing	 the
presumption,  therefore,  does	not  arise  at	this  stage.
Lastly, it  was submitted by Mr. Rao that he should be given
a chance  to produce  the  materials  before  the  Court  to
satisfy that  the Sanctioning Authority had duly applied its
mind to the facts constituting the offence. We are, however,
unable to  accede to  this prayer  which has  been made at a
very late  stage. The  prosecution had	been afforded a full
and complete  opportunity at  the  trial  stage	 to  produce
whatever material  it liked and it had chosen to examine two
witnesses but  for reasons  best known to it did not produce
the note  which formed	the subject matter of the Resolution
of the	Sanctioning Authority-Exh.  P-16. It is well settled
that in	 a criminal  case this	Court or for that matter any
court should not ordinarily direct fresh evidence to fill up
a lacuna delibrately left by the prosecution. The liberty of
the subject  was put in jeopardy and it cannot be allowed to
put in	jeopardy again	at the	instance of  the prosecution
which failed to avail of the opportunity afforded to it.
     For these reasons, therefore, we are satisfied that the
present prosecution  was launched without any valid sanction
and, therefore,	 the cognizance	 taken by  the Special Judge
was  completely	  without  jurisdiction.   The	 appeal	  is
accordingly allowed.  The judgment  of the High Court is set
aside and  convictions and sentences passed on the appellant
are quashed.  The appellant  will now be discharged from his
bail bonds.
P.B.R.					     Appeal allowed.
1012




