

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Income Tax Officer & Ors vs M/S. Madnani Engineering Works ... on 4 January, 1979Equivalent citations: 1979 AIR 1450, 1979 SCR  (2) 905
Author: P Bhagwati
Bench: Bhagwati, P.N.
           PETITIONER:
INCOME TAX OFFICER & ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
M/S. MADNANI ENGINEERING WORKS LTD., CALCUTTA

DATE OF JUDGMENT04/01/1979

BENCH:
BHAGWATI, P.N.
BENCH:
BHAGWATI, P.N.
KOSHAL, A.D.

CITATION:
 1979 AIR 1450		  1979 SCR  (2) 905
 1979 SCC  (2) 455
 CITATOR INFO :
 R	    1987 SC1897	 (30)


ACT:
     Income Tax	 Act, 1961-S.  147(a)  Scope  of-Income	 Tax
Officer at  first refused to give reasons for believing that
income escaped	assessment-In the  second affidavit  did not
set out	 any material  for the	basis of his belief-Validity
of.



HEADNOTE:
     In respect	 of the assessment year 1959-60 the assessee
was allowed  deduction of  interest paid  to creditors	from
whom it	 claimed to  have  borrowed  moneys  on	 hundis.  In
January, 1968  the Income Tax Officer issued a notice to the
assessee under	s. 147(a) of the Income-tax Act, 1961 on the
ground that  the transactions  of loans	 represented by	 the
hundis were  bogus and	no interest was paid by it to any of
the creditors  shown in	 the hundis,  that  it	was  wrongly
allowed	 as   a	 deduction  and	 therefore  a  part  of	 the
assessee's income  had escaped	assessment by  reason of its
failure to  disclose fully  and	 truly	all  material  facts
necessary for the assessment.
     In the  assessee's writ  petition before the High Court
the Income  Tax Officer	 at first  declined to	disclose the
facts which had weighed with him in reaching the belief that
income had  escaped assessment	on the	ground that  if they
were  disclosed	 it  would  cause  great  prejudice  to	 the
interests of  revenue and  would  frustrate  the  object  of
reopening the assessment. Later however, realising that this
stand was  untenable he	 gave his  reasons for	issuing	 the
notice.
     A	Single	 Judge	of  the	 High  Court  dismissed	 the
assessee's writ	 petition. On  appeal a	 Division Bench held
that there  was no  failure on	the part  of the assessee to
disclose fully	and truly all material facts and that in any
event the  Income Tax  Officer had no reason to believe that
any part  of the  income had escaped assessment by reason of
such failure on the assessee's part. Dismissing the appeal,
^
     HELD:
     There was	no failure  on the  part of  the asscssee to
disclose fully	and truly  all material	 facts necessary for
its assessment and the condition for the applicability of s.
147(a) was  not satisfied.  The notice	in the circumstances
was void. [1910 A]
     (1) In  CIT v.  Burlop Dealers  Ltd., 79  ITR 609	this
Court held  that there	was no obligation on the part of the
assessee to  disclose that the documents produced by it were
bogus and that the entries made in its books of account were
false. The  assessee discharged its obligation by disclosing
its books of accounts and evidence from which material facts
could be  discovered and it is for the Income Tax Officer to
decide whether the documents were genuine or false. [909 F]
906
     In the  instant case  the assessee could not be said to
have failed to make true and full disclosure of the material
facts by  not confessing  before the Income Tax Officer that
the hundis  and the entries in the books of account produced
before him were bogus. [909 G]
     CIT v. Burlop Dealers Ltd. 79 ITR 609; applied.
     (2) All  that the	Income Tax  Officer  stated  in	 his
affidavit was  that he	discovered that	 the transactions of
loan against  security of  hundis were	not genuine and that
the credits  against the  names of  certain persons who were
alleged to  have advanced  the loans  were bogus.  He merely
stated his  belief but	did not	 set out any material on the
basis of which he had arrived at such belief. [910 C]
     (3) The  existence of  reason to believe on the part of
the Income  Tax Officer is a justiceable issue and it is for
the court  to be  satisfied whether  in fact  the Income Tax
Officer had  any material  on the  basis of  which he  could
reasonably entertain such belief. [907 D]



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Civil  Appeal No. 829 of
1975.
     From the  Judgment	 and  Order  dated  11-4-74  of	 the
Calcutta High  Court in	 Appeal from  original	Order  dated
221/70.
     S.	 C.  Manchanda,	 and  Miss  A.	Subhashini  for	 the
Appellant
     V. S.  Desai, Sanjay  Bhattacharya and  Rathin Dass for
the Respondent.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     BHAGWATI, J.-This	appeal by  certificate	is  directed
against an  order passed  by a	Division Bench	of the	High
Court of Calcutta allowing an appeal against a decision of a
Single Judge dismissing the writ petition of the respondent.
The facts giving rise to the appeal may be briefly stated as
follows:
     The respondent  was  assessed  to	income-tax  for	 the
assessment year	 1959-60 and  certain interest	paid by	 the
respondent  to	creditors  from	 whom  it  claimed  to	have
borrowed  monies   on  hundis,	was  allowed  as  deductible
expenditure. The  assessment of the respondent was completed
on 23rd	 August, 1960.	On  or	about  25th  January,  1968,
however, a Notice was issued by the Income Tax Officer under
Section 148  of the  Income Tax	 Act, 1961  to	re-open	 the
assessment of  the respondent  for the assessment year 1959-
60. The	 Notice was  obviously under  Section 147(a) since a
period of  four years  had already elapsed from the close of
the assessment	year 1959-60  and no  Notice could be issued
under Section  147(b). The  Income Tax	Officer claimed that
the transactions  of loan  represented by  the	hundis	were
bogus and  no interest	was paid by the respondent to any of
the
907
creditors shown	 in the hundis and it was wrongly allowed as
a deduction and hence a part of the income of the respondent
had escaped  assessment by  reason of  the  failure  of	 the
respondent to  disclose fully  and truly  all material facts
necessary for  its assessment. The respondent challenged the
validity of  the Notice	 issued by the Income Tax Officer by
filing a  writ petition	 in the	 Calcutta  High	 Court.	 The
respondent contended  that there  was no failure on its part
to disclose fully and truly all material facts necessary for
its assessment	and that in any event the Income Tax Officer
had no	reason to believe that any part of the income of the
respondent had	escaped assessment by reason of such failure
on the part of the respondent. The Income Tax Officer in the
affidavit in  reply filed  by  him  on	5th  December,	1968
declined to disclose the facts which had weighed with him in
reaching the  belief that  the income  of the respondent had
escaped assessment  by reason  of its  failure	to  disclose
fully and  truly all  material facts,  on the ground that if
such facts  were disclosed to the respondent, it would cause
great prejudice	 to the	 interests of  the Revenue and would
frustrate the  object of re-opening the assessment. This was
obviously an untenable stand because the existence of reason
to believe  on the  part of  the Income	 Tax Officer  was  a
justiceable issue  and it  was for the court to be satisfied
whether in fact the Income Tax Officer had reason to believe
that income  had escaped  assessment by reason of failure of
the respondent	to make	 a full	 and  true  disclosure.	 The
Income Tax  Officer realising  this position filed a further
affidavit on 27th January, 1970 stating as follows:
     "In January 1968 I was the Income Tax Officer 'I' Ward,
Hundi Circle,  Calcutta. On or about the 25th January 1968 I
issued a  notice under	Section 148  of the  Income Tax Act,
1961 on	 the petitioner.  My reasons for issuing such notice
were these.  In the  course of	assessment of the petitioner
for assessment	year 1963-64  it was discovered that various
items shown  as loans  against the security of hundis in the
petitioner's books of account for the previous year relevant
to assessment  year 1959-60 were in fact fictitious. Credits
against the  names of  certain persons	as  having  advanced
loans  viz.   Amarlal  Moolchand,   Girdharidas,  Reghoomal,
Murlidhar,  Kanhaiyalal	  and	Deudaram   Basdeo   in	 the
petitioner's books were found not to be genuine. It appeared
during assessment  proceedings for 1963-64 that none of such
loans were  genuine. In the premises, it appeared to me that
the petitioner	had failed  to disclose	 fully and truly all
material facts	necessary for  its assessment, and a portion
of the	petitioner's income had escaped assessment by reason
of such failure".
908
     The writ  petition was  heard by  a Single Judge of the
High Court  and he  took the  view that the affidavit of the
Income Tax  Officer dated  27th January, 1970 clearly showed
that he	 had reason to believe that income of the respondent
had escaped  assessment by reason of its failure to disclose
fully and  truly  all  material	 facts	and  he	 accordingly
dismissed the  writ petition.  The respondent  preferred  an
appeal and  a Division	Bench of  the High Court disagreeing
with the  view taken by the Single Judge held that there was
no failure  on the  part of the respondent to disclose fully
and truly  all material	 facts and in any event there was no
material on  the basis	of which  it could  be said that the
Income Tax  Officer had	 reason to  believe that any part of
the income  had escaped assessment by reason of such failure
on  the	  part	of   the  respondent.	The  Division  Bench
accordingly allowed  the writ  petition and  quashed and set
aside the  Notice for  re-opening the assessment. The Income
Tax Officer  thereupon preferred  the present appeal to this
Court after obtaining a certificate from the High Court.
     The present  case is clearly covered by the decision of
this Court in Commissioner of Income Tax, Calcutta v. Burlop
Dealers Ltd.  There  the  assessee  in	the  course  of	 its
original assessment  to income-tax  for the  assessment year
1949-50	 had  produced	a  partnership	agreement  with	 one
Ratiram Tansukhrai and claimed that the profits earned by it
from H.	 Manory Ltd.  had been	divided between	 itself	 and
Ratiram Tansukhrai  under the  partnership agreement and its
one-half share	of the	profit, namely, Rs. 87,937/- was the
only amount assessable to tax in respect of this source. The
Income Tax  Officer accepted  the partnership  agreement and
assessed the assessee only on the profit of Rs. 87,937/-. It
appears that while making assessment for the assessment year
1950-51 the  Income Tax	 Officer found	that the partnership
agreement between  the assessee and Ratiram Tansukhrai was a
got up	device to  reduce the profit received from H. Manory
Ltd. and  the assessee	was, therefore, liable to tax on the
entire amount of profit coming from H. Manory Ltd. This view
taken by  the Income  Tax Officer was confirmed on appeal by
the Appellate  Assistant Commissioner  and  the	 Income	 Tax
Tribunal. The High Court also on a reference agreed with the
view of	 the Tribunal.	The  Income  Tax  Officer  thereupon
issued a  Notice under	Section 34(1)  (a) of the Income Tax
Act to	re-open the  assessment	 of  the  assessee  for	 the
assessment year 1949-50 in order to bring to tax the further
amount of  Rs. 87,937/-	 being the  half share of the profit
from H.	 Manory Ltd.  alleged to  have been  paid to Ratiram
Tansukhrai under  the partnership  agreement.  The  assessee
con-
909
tended that  it had  produced all  the relevant accounts and
documents necessary for completing the assessment and it was
under no  obligation to	 inform the Income Tax Officer about
the true nature of the transaction and there was accordingly
no failure  on its  part to  disclose fully  and  truly	 all
material facts necessary for its assessment. This contention
was negatived  by the  Income Tax  Officer and the income of
the assessee  was re-assessed  by adding Rs. 87,937/- to the
income returned	 by the	 assessee. The	Appellate  Assistant
Commisioner confirmed the order of the Income Tax Officer on
appeal, but  on further	 appeal, the  Tribunal accepted	 the
contention of  the assessee  and  held	that  there  was  no
failure on  the part of the assessee to make a full and true
disclosure of  the material  facts and	hence the Income Tax
Officer	 was   not  justified  in  seeking  to	re-open	 the
assessment under  Section 34(1)	 (a) of	 the Income Tax Act.
The Revenue  applied to the Tribunal for a reference but the
application was	 rejected and  the High Court also dismissed
the application	 of the	 Revenue for calling for a reference
from the Tribunal. The Revenue thereupon preferred an appeal
to this	 Court by  special leave. The appeal was rejected by
this Court on the ground that the assessee had disclosed all
its books  of account and evidence from which material facts
could be discovered and it was under no obligation to inform
the Income  Tax Officer	 about the possible inferences which
might be  raised against  him and hence there was no failure
on its	part to	 disclose the  preliminary facts relevant to
the assessment	which  would  invite  the  applicability  of
Section 34(1)  (a). It	will thus  be seen that according to
this judgment,	there was  no obligation  on the assessee to
disclose that  the partnership	agreement produced by it was
bogus and  that the  entries made  by it  in  its  books  of
accounts were  false. The assessee discharged the obligation
which lay  upon it  by disclosing  its books  of account and
evidence from  which material  facts could be discovered and
it was	for the	 Income Tax  Officer to	 decide whether	 the
documents produced  by the  assessee were  genuine or false.
Here also  the respondent  produced all	 the hundis  on	 the
strength of  which it  had obtained  loans from creditors as
also entries  in the  books of	account showing	 payment  of
interest  and	it  was	  for  the  Income  Tax	 Officer  to
investigate  and  determine  whether  these  documents	were
genuine or  not. The  respondent could	not be	said to have
failed to  make a  true and  full disclosure of the material
facts by  not confessing  before the Income Tax Officer that
the hundis  and the entries in the books of account produced
by it  were bogus.  We do  not see  any distinction  at	 all
between Burlop	Dealers case (supra) and the present one and
the language  of Section 147(a) being identical with that of
Section 34(1)(a),  the	ratio  of  the	decision  in  Burlop
Dealers case (supra) must govern the decision of the present
case. We
910
must, therefore,  hold that there was no failure on the part
of the	respondent to  disclose fully and truly all material
facts necessary for its assessment and the condition for the
applicability of Section 147(a) was not satisfied.
     We may  also point	 out that though it was contended in
the Writ  Petition that the Income Tax Officer could have no
reason to  believe that	 any  part  of	the  income  of	 the
respondent had	escaped assessment  by reason of its failure
to make	 a full	 and true  disclosure of material facts, the
Income Tax  Officer did	 not disclose  in his  affidavit any
material on  the basis of which it could be said that he had
come to	 the requisite	belief.	 All  that  the	 Income	 Tax
Officer stated	in his affidavit was that he discovered that
the transactions of loan against security of hundis were not
genuine and  that the  credits against	the names of certain
persons who  were alleged to have advanced loans were bogus.
The Income  Tax Officer merely stated his belief but did not
set out any material on the basis of which he had arrived at
such belief  so that  the  Court  could	 decide	 for  itself
whether there  was any	material on  the basis	of which the
Income Tax  Officer could  reasonably entertain such belief.
We are,	 therefore, not	 at all	 satisfied on  the affidavit
that the  Income Tax  Officer had  reason to  believe that a
part of	 the income of the respondent had escaped assessment
by reason  of its failure to make a true and full disclosure
of the	material facts.	 The Notice  under Section 147(a) of
the Income Tax Act for re-opening the assessment must in the
circumstances be held to be void.
     We accordingly dismiss the appeal with costs.
P.B.R.					   Appeal dismissed.
911




