

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Pushpaben & Anr vs Narandas V. Badiani & Anr on 29 March, 1979Equivalent citations: 1979 AIR 1536, 1979 SCR  (3) 636
Author: S M Fazalali
Bench: Fazalali, Syed Murtaza
           PETITIONER:
PUSHPABEN & ANR.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
NARANDAS V. BADIANI & ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT29/03/1979

BENCH:
FAZALALI, SYED MURTAZA
BENCH:
FAZALALI, SYED MURTAZA
KOSHAL, A.D.

CITATION:
 1979 AIR 1536		  1979 SCR  (3) 636
 1979 SCC  (2) 394


ACT:
     Contempt of  Courts Act-Section 12(3)-Scope of-Sentence
of imprisonment-When should be awarded in civil contempt.



HEADNOTE:
     Respondent No.  1 filed  a complaint  under s.  420 IPC
against the  appellants alleging  that a  loan taken by them
from him  had not  been	 repaid.  While	 the  complaint	 was
pending before	a Magistrate  the  parties  entered  into  a
compromise under which the appellants undertook to repay the
loan before  a stipulated  date. The  Magistrate accordingly
allowed the parties to compound the case.
     When  the	appellants  failed  to	repay  the  loan  in
accordance with	 the undertaking given before the Magistrate
the respondent	moved  the  High  Court	 for  taking  action
against the  appellants for  contempt of  court. On the view
that the  appellants had committed a willful disobedience of
the undertaking the High Court held that they were guilty of
civil contempt	and sentenced  them to	one  month's  simple
imprisonment.
     Allowing the appeal in part,
^
     HELD:  1.	 The  appellants   had	 committed   willful
disobedience of	 the court  of the  Magistrate by committing
serious breach	of the	undertaking given to it on the basis
of which  alone they had been acquitted. The High Court was,
therefore, right  in holding that the appellants were guilty
of civil  contempt under  s. 2(b)  of the Contempt of Courts
Act. [638 A]
     2. Having	regard to  the circumstances of the case the
present case  falls within the first part of s. 12(3) of the
Act and a sentence of fine alone should have been awarded by
the High  Court. By  enacting the  section  the	 legislature
intended that  a sentence of fine alone should be imposed in
normal circumstances.  Special power  is, however, conferred
on the	court to  pass a  sentence  of	imprisonment  if  it
thought that  ends of justice so required. Therefore, before
a court	 passed a  sentence of	imprisonment  it  must	give
special reasons for passing such a sentence. [638 G]
     In the  present case  there are  no special reasons why
the appellants should be sent to jail



JUDGMENT:
     CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 43
of 1975.
     From the  Judgment and  Order  dated  9-1-1973  of	 the
Bombay High Court in Criminal Application No. 681/72.
     V. S.  Desai, P.  H. Parekh, C. B. Singh, M. Mudgol, B.
L. Verma and J.C. Rajani, for the Appellants.
637
     M. N. Shroff for the Respondents.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     FAZAL ALI,	 J.-This is  an appeal	under S.  19 of	 the
Contempt of  Courts Act (hereinafter called the Act) against
an  order  of  the  High  Court	 of  Bombay  convicting	 the
appellants for	a Civil	 Contempt and sentencing them to one
month's simple imprisonment. The facts of the case have been
fully detailed by the High Court and it is not necessary for
us to  repeat the  same all  over  again.  It  appears	that
Respondent No.	1 had  given a	loan of	 Rs. 50,000/- to the
appellants on certain conditions. Somehow or other, the loan
could not  be paid  by the  appellants as  a result of which
Respondent No.	1 filed	 a complaint  under  S.	 420  I.P.C.
against the  appellants. While	the  complaint	was  pending
before the Court of the Magistrate, the parties entered into
a  compromise	on  22-7-1971  under  which  the  appellants
undertook to  pay the  loan  of	 Rs.  50,000/-	with  simple
interest  @  12%  per  annum  on  or  before  21-7-1972.  An
application was	 filed before  the Court  for  allowing	 the
parties to  compound the  case and  acquit the	accused. The
Court  after  hearing  the  parties,  passed  the  following
order:-
	  "The accused	given an  undertaking to  the  court
     that he  shall repay  the sum  of Rs.  50,000/- to	 the
     complainant on  or before	21-7-1972 with	interest  as
     mentioned on the reverse. In view of the undertaking, I
     permit the compromise and acquit the accused".
     It is  obvious, therefore, that the Court permitted the
parties to compound the case only because of the undertaking
given by the appellants.
     Thereafter,  it   appears,	 that  the  undertaking	 was
violated and  the  amount  of  loan  was  not  paid  to	 the
Respondent No.	1 at  all. The	respondent, therefore, moved
the High  Court for  taking action  for	 contempt  of  Court
against the  appellants as  a result  of which	the  present
proceedings were  taken against them. The High Court came to
the conclusion	that the  appellants had  committed a wilful
disobedience of the undertaking given to the Court and were,
therefore, guilty of civil contempt as defined in S. 2(b) of
the Act. Hence, this appeal before us.
     Mr. V.  S. Desai appearing in support of the appeal has
raised two  short points  before us.  He has  submitted that
there is  no doubt  that the  appellants  had  violated	 the
undertaking but	 in the circumstances it cannot be said that
the appellants	had committed  a wilful	 disobedience of the
orders of  the Court.  So far as this point is concerned, we
fully agree  with the  High Court. In the circumstances, the
appellants undoubtedly	committed wilful disobedience of the
order of the court
638
by committing  a serious  breach of the undertaking given to
the Court  on the  basis of  which alone, the appellants had
been acquitted.	 For these reasons, the first contention put
forward by Mr. Desai, is overruled.
     It is,  then, contended  that under  S. 12(3), normally
the sentence  that should  be given  to an  offender who  is
found  guilty	of  civil   contempt,  is   fine   and	 not
imprisonment, which  should be given only where the Court is
satisfied that	ends of	 justice require  the imposition  of
such a	sentence. In our opinion, this contention of learned
counsel for the appellants is well-founded and must prevail.
Sub-section 3 of S. 12 reads thus :-
	  "Notwithstanding  anything   contained   in	this
     section, where  a person  is found	 guilty of  a  civil
     contempt, the  Court, if  it considers that a fine will
     not meet  the ends	 of justice  and that  a sentence of
     imprisonment is  necessary shall, instead of sentencing
     him to  simple imprisonment, direct that he be detained
     in a  civil prison	 for such  period not  exceeding six
     months as it may think fit".
     A close  and careful  interpretation of  the  extracted
section leaves	no  room  for  doubt  that  the	 Legislature
intended that  a sentence of fine alone should be imposed in
normal circumstances.  The statute, however, confers special
power on  the Court to pass a sentence of imprisonment if it
think that  ends of  justice so require. Thus before a Court
passes the  extreme sentence  of imprisonment,	it must give
special reasons	 after a proper application of its mind that
a  sentence  of	 imprisonment  alone  is  called  for  in  a
particular situation  Thus, the	 sentence of imprisonment is
an exception while sentence of fine is the rule.
     Having regard  to the  peculiar facts and circumstances
of this	 case, we  do not  find any  special reason  why the
appellants should  be sent  to jail  by sentencing  them  to
imprisonment.  Furthermore,   respondent  No.  1  before  us
despite service,  has not  appeared to	support the sentence
given  by   the	 High	Court.	Having	 regard	  to   these
circumstances, therefore,  we are satisfied that the present
case, squarely	falls in  the first  part of  S. 12(3) and a
sentence of  fine alone	 should have  been given by the High
Court. We,  therefore, allow this appeal to this extent that
the sentence of imprisonment passed by the High Court is set
aside and instead the appellants are sentenced to pay a fine
of Rs.	1000/- each.  In case  of default,  15	days  simple
imprisonment. Four weeks time to pay the fine.
P.B.R.				     Appeal allowed in part.
639




