

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Dera Phalauli vs State Of Punjab & Ors on 24 July, 1979Equivalent citations: 1979 AIR 1594, 1980 SCR  (1)	 23
Author: N Untwalia
Bench: Untwalia, N.L.
           PETITIONER:
DERA PHALAULI

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF PUNJAB & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT24/07/1979

BENCH:
UNTWALIA, N.L.
BENCH:
UNTWALIA, N.L.
SEN, A.P. (J)

CITATION:
 1979 AIR 1594		  1980 SCR  (1)	 23
 1979 SCC  (4) 485
 CITATOR INFO :
 RF	    1981 SC 818	 (61)


ACT:
     Land Acquisition  Act, 1894  Ss. 4,  5A  &	 17(4)-Order
issued under  S. 17(4)	dispensing with provisions of S. 5A-
Validity of-Direction  to Collector  to take action under S.
17 on ground of urgency-Not a legal and complete fulfillment
of the requirement of the law.



HEADNOTE:
     Allowing the appeal.
^
     HELD:  For	 making	 the  provisions  of  section  17(1)
applicable: (a)	 the land  in respect  of which	 the urgency
provision is being applied should be waste or arable and (b)
there should  be an  urgency for taking immediate possession
requiring dispensation	of the right of the owner for filing
an objection  under section  5A and this right should not be
interfered in a casual or cavalier manner. [94C, F]
     In the  instant case  the	Notification  under  section
17(4) of the Act neither mentioned that the land is waste or
arable nor  that there	was urgency  to take recourse to the
provisions of the Act. [94D]
     The direction  given to  the Collector  to take  action
under Section 17 on the ground of urgency is not a legal and
complete fulfillment of the requirement of the law. [94E]



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 2317 of
1969.
     From the  Judgment and  Order dated  29-8-1968  of	 the
Punjab and Haryana High Court in Civil Writ No. 2713/68.
     N. N. Keswani for the Appellant.
     The Order of the Court was delivered by
     UNTWALIA, J.  In  this  appeal  filed  by	certificate,
several points	have been  urged by  learned counsel for the
appellant. We  do not  consider it necessary either to state
all the	 points or  discuss them  as none of them except one
has got	 any substance.	 The point of substance which in our
opinion must succeed in this appeal is as to whether even on
the face  of the Notification issued under Section 4 of Land
Acquisition Act, 1894 (hereinafter called the Act), an Order
under Section  17(4) dispensing with the compliance with the
provisions of  Section 5A was validly made. The paragraph of
the Notification which incorporated
94
apparently the	order exercising the power under Sub-Section
(4) of Section 17 of the Act reads as follows:-
	  "Further in  exercise of the powers under the said
     Act, the  Governor of  Punjab is pleased to direct that
     action under  Section 17 shall be taken in this case on
     the grounds  of urgency  and provisions  of section  5A
     will not apply in regard to this acquisition."
     It is  to be  clearly understood that under Sub-Section
(4),  the   appropriate	 Government   may  direct  that	 the
provision of Section 5A shall not apply where in the opinion
of the	State Government,  the provisions of Sub-Section (1)
or Sub-Section(2)  are applicable, otherwise not. For making
the provisions	of Sub-Section	(1) applicable,	 two  things
must be	 satisfied that	 the land  in respect  of which	 the
urgency provision  is being  applied is	 waste or arable and
secondly that  there is	 an urgency to proceed in the matter
of taking immediate possession and so the right of the owner
of the	land for filing an objection under Section 5A should
not be	made  available	 to  him.  In  the  portion  of	 the
Notification which  we have  extracted above,  it is neither
mentioned that	the land  is waste or arable nor has it been
stated that  in the opinion of the Government, there was any
urgency to  take recourse to the provisions of Section 17 of
the Act. A direction to the Collector has been given to take
action under Section 17 on the ground of urgency but this is
not a  legal and  complete fulfillment of the requirement of
the law.  It is	 to be remembered that the right of a person
having any  interest in	 the property  to file	an objection
under Section 5A of the Act should not be interfered with in
such a	casual or  cavalier manner  as has been done in this
case.
     For the  reasons stated above, we allow this appeal set
aside the order of the High Court dismissing the appellant's
writ Petition,	allow the writ Petition and strike down that
portion	 of  the  Notification	issued	on  23-8-1967  under
Section 4  of the  Act which  directed the exercise of power
under Section  17.  The	 authorities,  if  so  advised,	 may
proceed further in the matter after giving an opportunity to
the appellant of filing their objection under Section 5A.
     Since the	other side  has not  appeared, there  is  no
order as to costs.
N.V.K.					     Appeal allowed.
95




