

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Devki Alias Kala vs The State Of Haryana on 24 July, 1979Equivalent citations: 1979 AIR 1948, 1980 SCR  (1)	 21
Author: V Krishnaiyer
Bench: Krishnaiyer, V.R.
           PETITIONER:
DEVKI ALIAS KALA

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
THE STATE OF HARYANA

DATE OF JUDGMENT24/07/1979

BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
DESAI, D.A.
KOSHAL, A.D.

CITATION:
 1979 AIR 1948		  1980 SCR  (1)	 21
 1979 SCC  (3) 760


ACT:
     Sentencing process-Plea  for an  order to release anti-
social specialist criminals on probation under the Probation
of Offenders  Act, 1958	 (Act XX  of 1958)  is an  insulting
stultification of the amelioratory legislation.



HEADNOTE:
     The  petitioner   was  convicted  and  sentenced  under
Sections 366  and 368  Penal code  to three  years' rigorous
imprisonment on	 each count  for the  offences of abduction,
seduction and  sale of	girls to others. In appeal, the High
Court confirmed	 the said  order of conviction under Section
366 I.P.C.  but set  aside the	conviction under Section 368
ibid.
     Dismissing the special leave petition, the Court
^
     HELD:  It	 is  an	  insulting  stultification  of	 the
amelioratory legislation  viz. Probation of Offenders Act to
extend	its   considerate  provisions  to  such	 anti-social
specialist criminals,  as in this case, where the petitioner
an abominable  culprit with  sufficient expertise in the art
of abduction  seduction and  sale of  girls, descended	in a
taxi cab,  kidnapped the  young woman and when she cried out
administered the  potion which	rendered her unconscious and
by a  well-laid out  plan took	her from  the small  town in
Bihar to  Dhanbad and  from there,  via Delhi to Haryana and
lodged her in a house for obvious immoral purposes.[82C-E]



JUDGMENT:
     CRIMINAL APPELLATE	 JURISDICTION : Petition for Special
Leave to Appeal (Criminal) No. 1839 of 1979.
     Appeal by	Special Leave  from the	 Judgment and  Order
dated 19-1-1973	 of the	 Punjab and  Haryana High  Court  in
Criminal Appeal No. 329/75.
     J. P. Goyal and S. K. Jain for the Petitioner.
     The Order of the Court was delivered by
     KRISHNA IYER, J. Parvati, an unsophisticated girl of 17
was wending  her way  home at  about sunset  along a  public
street in  the artless	town of	 Sitalpur in Bihar when Smt.
Devki, the  petitioner	before	us,  with  diabolic  design,
swooped down  and snatched  her into  a taxi-cab  and blized
away. The weeping victim was medicated into unconsciousness,
removed to  Dhanbad and	 further on, to destination Haryana.
Tragically, where  tourists abound,  satellite industries in
female	flesh  flourish,  unless  the  State  crusades	with
militant zeal  to stamp	 out  this  terrible  vice.  Anyway,
Parvati, by now enslaved in a village villa. was offered for
marital sale to affluent lecherous youths. The damsel
92
in distress desperately escaped through a half-ajar door and
eventually  landed   in	 a   police  station.	The   police
investigation unravelled  the pathetic story and ended up in
a case,	 conviction, appeal,  confirmation and,	 finally, in
this special  leave petition to this Court which is the last
refuge of every vanquished litigant.
     Confronted by concurrent findings of guilt, counsel for
the petitioner	gave up	 his attack  on the  conviction	 and
concentrated his  fire on the sentence, which, in this case,
was three  years' rigorous  imprisonment.  For	what  ?	 For
abducting  a  teenage  girl  and  forcing  her	into  sexual
submission with commercial object, a racket which has become
an   enormous	 national   menace,    notwithstanding	 the
constitutional concern	for the weaker sex. Counsel dared to
urge that  the Probation of Offenders Act should be extended
to  this   abominable  culprit	 who  had  shown  sufficient
expertise in  the art  of abduction,  seduction and  sale of
girls to  others who offer a tempting price. The features of
this case  show that  the petitioner suddenly descended in a
taxi-cab and  kidnapped the  young woman, and when she cried
out, administered the potion which rendered her unconscious.
Furthermore, a	well layout  plan is discernible when we see
the geographical  spread of  the crime. From a small town in
Bihar, the girl is despatched to Dhanbad and from there, via
Delhi, to  Haryana, lodged  in a  house where young men were
asked to  view her  for obvious	 immoral purposes.  It is an
insulting stultification  of  the  amelioratory	 legislation
viz. Probation	of Offenders  Act to  extend its considerate
provisions to  such anti-social,  specialist criminals.	 All
that we	 can do	 is to	reject the plea with indignation and
follow it  up with  an appeal  to the  State Governments  of
Bihar and of Haryana to put a special squad on the trail and
hound out  every such  offender so  that the  streets of our
towns and  cities may be sanitized and safe after sunset for
Indian womanhood. Dismissed.
S.R.					 Petition dismissed.
93




