

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Krishna Kumar vs Divisional Assistant Electrical ... on 17 July, 1979Equivalent citations: 1979 AIR 1912, 1979 SCR  (1)	 50
Author: Y Chandrachud
Bench: Chandrachud, Y.V. ((Cj)
           PETITIONER:
KRISHNA KUMAR

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
DIVISIONAL ASSISTANT ELECTRICAL ENGINEERCENTRAL RAILWAY AND

DATE OF JUDGMENT17/07/1979

BENCH:
CHANDRACHUD, Y.V. ((CJ)
BENCH:
CHANDRACHUD, Y.V. ((CJ)
FAZALALI, SYED MURTAZA
VENKATARAMIAH, E.S. (J)

CITATION:
 1979 AIR 1912		  1979 SCR  (1)	 50
 1979 SCC  (4) 289


ACT:
     Constitution of  India, 1950,  Article 311(1)-Power  to
remove an  employee rests only with the person who appointed
him-A delegate's  status is  not enhanced  to  that  of	 the
delegator by  virtue of	 delegation of power of appointment-
Date  of   appointment	is   the  starting  point  when	 the
constitutional guarantee under Art. 311(1) becomes available
to the person holding a civil post.



HEADNOTE:
     The appellant  who was  appointed as  a Train  Lighting
Inspector, Nagpur  on July  11, 1974 by the Chief Electrical
Engineer was  removed from  service by respondent No. 1; the
Divisional Assistant Engineer, Central Railway Nagpur by his
order August  31, 1976.	 The  Writ  Petition  filed  by	 the
appellant in  the Bombay High Court challenging the order of
removal was  dismissed summarily by a Division Bench of that
Court.
     Allowing the appeal by special leave, the Court
^
     HELD: 1. The order of removal is in patent violation of
the provisions of Article 311(1) of the Constitution. [53C]
     2. Art.  311(1) of	 the Constitution  provides that  no
person who is a member of a civil service of the Union or an
all India  service or  a civil service of a State or holds a
civil post  under the Union or a State shall be dismissed or
removed by  an authority subordinate to that by which he was
appointed. [52A]
     3. Whether	 or not	 an authority is subordinate in rank
to another  has to be determined with reference to the state
of affairs  existing on	 the date  of appointment.  It is at
that point  of time  that the constitutional guarantee under
Art. 311(1)  becomes available	to the	person holding,	 for
example, a  civil post	under the  Union Government  that he
shall  not   be	 removed   or  dismissed   by  an  authority
subordinate to that which appointed him. [52 F-G]
     4.	 Delegation  of	 the  power  to	 make  a  particular
appointment does  not enhance  or improve  the	hierarchical
status of  the delegate.  An officer  subordinate to another
will not become his equal in rank by reason of his coming to
possess some of the powers of that another. [53 A-B]
     The Divisional  Assistant Electrical  Engineer  in	 the
instant case does not cease to be subordinate in rank to the
Chief Electrical  Engineer merely because the latter's power
to make	 appointments to certain posts has been delegated to
him  the   subsequent  authorisation   made  in	  favour  of
respondent, in	regard to  making appointments	to the	post
held by	 the appellant	cannot confer  upon respondent 1 the
power to remove him. On the date of the
51
appellant's  appointment  as  a	 Train	Lighting  Inspector,
respondent 1  had no  power to	make  that  appointment.  He
cannot have, therefore, the power to remove him. [52H, 53 A-
B]



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Civil  Appeal No. 755 of
1978.
     Appeal by Special Leave from the Order dated 21-10-1976
of the	Bombay High  Court  (Nagpur  Bench)  in	 S.C.A.	 No.
4260/76.
     R.K. Garg,	 Edward Faleire,  V.J. Francis and D.K. Garg
for the Appellant.
     R.P. Bhat and Girish Chandra for the Respondents.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     CHANDRACHUD, C.J.	The appellant,	Krishna	 Kumar,	 was
appointed  on	May  30,  1966	as  an	Apprentice  Mechanic
(Electrical)  after   selection	 by   the  Railway   Service
Commission and	on the completion of his training period, he
was appointed  as a Train Examiner (Electrical). On July 11,
1974 he	 was appointed as a Train Lighting Inspector, Nagpur
under an order passed by the Chief Electrical Engineer. That
the  order   of	 appointment  was  made	 by  the  C.E.E.  is
undisputed and	indeed there  can be no controversy over it.
The list  of officer  declared to  be heads  of	 departments
shows that  Chief Electrical  Engineers are  heads of  their
departments.  By   an  order  dated  August  31,  1976,	 the
appellant was  removed from  service by	 respondent  1,	 the
Divisional Assistant Engineer, Central Railway, Nagpur.
     The appellant thereupon filed a Writ Petition (No. 4260
of 1976)  in the Bombay High Court to challenge the order of
removal. A  Division Bench  of the  Nagpur Bench of the High
Court dismissed	 the Writ  Petition summarily on October 21,
1976. Being  aggrieved by that order the appellant has filed
this appeal by special leave.
     The Special Leave Petition came up before this Court on
February 22,  1978 when	 a Bench  consisting of Justice V.R.
Krishna	 Iyer	and  Justice  Jaswant  Singh  adjourned	 the
petition for  four weeks  in order to enable the respondents
to file	 an affidavit  stating as  to (i)  who appointed the
petitioner, with special reference to the designation of the
Officer who  made the  order of	 appointment  and  (ii)	 who
removed the  petitioner from service, with special reference
to  the	 designation  of  that	Officer.  Pursuant  to	that
direction, two	affidavits were	 filed by Shri S.P. Sarathy,
Divisional Assistant  Electrical Engineer,  Central Railway,
Nagpur. The  petitioner filed  his  rejoinder  affidavit  on
February 20,  1978. On	a consideration	 of these affidavits
the Court  on April  3, 1978  granted special  leave to	 the
appellant to file this appeal.
52
 Article 311  (1) of  the Constitution  provides that no
person who is a member of a civil service of the Union or an
all-India service  or a	 civil service of a State or holds a
civil post  under the Union or a State shall be dismissed or
removed by  an authority subordinate to that by which he was
appointed. The simple question for determination is whether,
as alleged  by the appellant, he was removed from service by
an authority  subordinate to  that which  had appointed him.
The relevant  facts  are  but  these  and  these  only:	 The
appellant was  appointed as a Train Lighting Inspector under
an order  issued by  the Chief	Electrical Engineer  and was
removed from service under an order passed by the Divisional
Assistant Electrical  Engineer, Central Railway, Nagpur. The
narrow question, therefore, for consideration is whether the
Divisional Assistant  Electrical Engineer  is subordinate in
rank  to   the	Chief	Electrical  Engineer.  None  of	 the
affidavits filed  by Shri  Sarathy, who	 passed the order of
removal	 says	that  the   post  of   Divisional  Assistant
Electrical Engineer  is equivalent  to	that  of  the  Chief
Electrical Engineer  in the  official  hierarchy.  That	 the
former is  not higher  in rank	than  the  latter  is  self-
evident. In  the circumstances,	 it  seems  clear  that	 the
appellant was  removed from service by an authority which is
subordinate in rank to that by which he was appointed.
     In defence	 of the	 legality of  the order	 of removal,
counsel	 for  the  respondents	relies	on  paragraph  2  of
respondent 1's	affidavit, dated January 7, 1978, wherein he
has stated  that the  power to make appointments to the post
of the	Train Lighting	Inspector was  delegated to  certain
other officers including the Divisional Assistant Electrical
Engineer. It  is urged	that since  the Div.  Asstt.  Elect.
Engineer has  been given  the power  to make appointments to
the post  of the Train Lighting Inspector, he would have the
power to  remove any person from that post. We cannot accept
this contention.  Whether or not an authority is subordinate
in rank	 to another  has to  be determined with reference to
the state of affairs existing on the date of appointment. It
is at  that point  of time that the constitutional guarantee
under Art.  311 (1) becomes available to the person holding,
for example, a civil post under the Union Government that he
shall  not   be	 removed   or  dismissed   by  an  authority
subordinate to	that which  appointed  him.  The  subsequent
authorization made  in favour  of respondent  1 in regard to
making appointments to the post held by the appellant cannot
confer upon  respondent 1  the power  to remove	 him. On the
date of	 the appellant's  appointment as  a  Train  Lighting
Inspector,  respondent	 1  had	  no  power   to  make	that
appointment. He	 cannot have, therefore, the power to remove
him.
53
     Besides, delegation  of the  power to make a particular
appointment does  not enhance  or improve  the	hierarchical
status of  the delegate.  An Officer  subordinate to another
will not become his equal in rank by reason of his coming to
possess some  of the  powers of that another. The Divisional
Engineer, in  other words,  does not cease to be subordinate
in rank	 to the Chief Electrical Engineer merely because the
latter's power	to make	 appointments to  certain posts	 has
been delegated to him.
     Since  the	  appellant  was   appointed  by  the  Chief
Electrical Engineer  and has been removed from service by an
order  passed	by  respondent	1  who,	 at  any  rate,	 was
subordinate in	rank to the Chief Electrical Engineer on the
date  of  appellant's  appointment,  it	 must  be  held	 the
respondent 1  had no  power to	remove	the  appellant	from
service. The  order of removal is in patent violation of the
provisions of Article 311 (1) of the Constitution.
     For these	reasons we  allow the  appeal, set aside the
order passed by the High Court and hold that the order dated
August	31,   1976  passed  by	respondent  1  removing	 the
appellant from	service is  unconstitutional and, therefore,
of no  effect. The  appellant must  accordingly be deemed to
continue in  service until,  if so  advised, the  government
takes appropriate steps to bring his service to an end.
     Respondents will  pay the	costs of  the appeal  to the
appellant.
V.D.K.					     Appeal allowed.
54




