

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Assistant Collector Of Central ... vs Jainson Hosiery Industries on 27 July, 1979Equivalent citations: 1979 AIR 1889, 1980 SCR  (1) 134
Author: V Krishnaiyer
Bench: Krishnaiyer, V.R.
           PETITIONER:
ASSISTANT COLLECTOR OF CENTRAL EXCISE

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
JAINSON HOSIERY INDUSTRIES

DATE OF JUDGMENT27/07/1979

BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
DESAI, D.A.
KOSHAL, A.D.

CITATION:
 1979 AIR 1889		  1980 SCR  (1) 134
 1979 SCC  (4)	22
 CITATOR INFO :
 E&D	    1985 SC1147	 (9)


ACT:
     Constitution  of	India,	1950-Art.   226-Exercise  of
jurisdiction under-Courts  to be  extremely  circumspect  in
granting   relief    during   the   pendency   of   criminal
investigations.



HEADNOTE:
     HELD: The	High Court  in exercising  its	jurisdiction
under Art.  226 of  the Constitution must have regard to the
well established  principles and unless it is satisfied that
the normal  statutory remedy is likely to be too dilatory to
give relief,  it should	 be loath  to act under Art. 226. It
should be  extremely circumspect  in granting  relief during
the pendency of criminal investigations. [134 G-H]
     The investigation	of a  criminal	offence	 is  a	very
sensitive phase	 where the  investigating authority  has  to
collect evidence  from all  odd corners and anything that is
likely to  thwart its  course may  inhibit the	interests of
justice. [135A]
     Courts must be very careful to see that every condition
or need	 that the  investigator points	out as essential for
discharging his	 investigative functions,  should be readily
conceded  unless  plainly  unreasonable.  At  the  stage  of
investigation it  is risky for the court to intervene except
where manifest injustice cries for its Order. [135C-D]



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Special  Leave  Petition
(Civil) No. 4059 of 1979.
     From the Judgment and Order dated 30-1-79 of the Punjab
and Haryana  High Court	 in Civil  Writ Petition  No. 106 of
1979.
     Soli J.  Sorabjee, Addl. Sol. Genl. of India and Girish
Chandra for the Petitioner.
     The Order of the Court was delivered by
     KRISHNA  IYER,  J.	 The  Additional  Solicitor  General
appearing for  the Petitioner,	the Assistant  Collector  of
Central Excise,	 complains that	 the Order of the High Court
under Article 226 of the Constitution is a wrong exercise of
its jurisdiction  because there	 is an alternative statutory
remedy under  the Central  Excise Act  for relief when goods
are seized.  It is  correct to	say that the High Court must
have regard  to the  well  established	principles  for	 the
exercise of its writ jurisdiction and unless it is satisfied
that the  normal  statutory  remedy  is	 likely	 to  be	 too
dilatory or  difficult to  give reasonably  quick relief, it
should be  loath to  act  under	 Article  226.	May  be,  in
exceptional
135
cases-the present  one does not appear to be one-that extra-
ordinary power may be exercised. So it is right to point out
that the  High	Courts	will  be  careful  to  be  extremely
circumspect in	granting these reliefs especially during the
pendency of  criminal investigations. The investigation of a
criminal  offence  is  a  very	sensitive  phase  where	 the
investigating authority has to collect evidence from all odd
corners and anything that is likely to thwart its course may
inhibit the  interests of justice. All that we need say here
is that	 the High  Courts will	bear in	 mind the  need	 for
extreme	 reluctance  when,  during  the	 investigation,	 any
relief interim	or final,  which has a tendency to slow down
or otherwise hamper the investigation, is sought.
     In	 the   present	case,	the  requirements  that	 the
prosecution put	 forward were  readily granted	by the	High
Court and  the need  for the containers which bear tell-tale
testimony necessary for the investigation does not appear to
have been  pointed out to the High Court. We certainly agree
that even  while releasing the goods the Courts must be very
careful to  see	 that  every  condition	 or  need  that	 the
investigator points  out as  essential for  discharging	 his
investigative functions,  should be  readily conceded by the
Court unless  plainly unreasonable.  After all, at the stage
of investigation  it is	 risky for  the Court  to  intervene
except where  manifest injustice  cries for the Order of the
Court.
     With these observations, we dismiss the Petition.
N.V.K.					 Petition dismissed.
136




