

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Sitaram Kashiram Konda vs Pigment Cakes & Chemicals Mfg. Co on 27 July, 1979Equivalent citations: 1980 AIR   16, 1980 SCR  (1) 125
Author: N Untwalia
Bench: Untwalia, N.L.
           PETITIONER:
SITARAM KASHIRAM KONDA

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
PIGMENT CAKES & CHEMICALS MFG. CO.

DATE OF JUDGMENT27/07/1979

BENCH:
UNTWALIA, N.L.
BENCH:
UNTWALIA, N.L.
SEN, A.P. (J)

CITATION:
 1980 AIR   16		  1980 SCR  (1) 125
 1979 SCC  (4)	12


ACT:
     Termination of  Service-Declaratory suit  to set  aside
the  termination   and	for   awarding	compensation-Dispute
whether of a civil nature cognizable by a civil court.



HEADNOTE:
     The appellant  filed a  suit against  his employer, the
respondent, for	 a declaration that he had been removed from
service illegally  and without any reason and that he should
be reinstated  in his  former  job  with  due  benefits	 and
advantages. He	also claimed  compensation. The	 trial court
held that  the dispute	raised by  the appellant  was in the
nature of an industrial dispute and that the civil court had
no jurisdiction	 to try	 the same. The First Appellate Court
allowed the appeal and held that the dispute raised was of a
civil nature  and the  case was cognizable by a civil court.
In the	respondent's second  appeal, the  High Court  agreed
with the view of the trial court and held that the appellant
had not	 claimed damages  by pleading wrongful dismissal and
breach of  the contract	 of his	 service and  that the facts
pleaded in  the	 plaint	 showed	 that  the  dispute  was  an
industrial dispute  cognizable only  by an  industrial court
and not by a civil court.
     In the  further appeal  to this  Court  the  point	 for
consideration was  whether  on	the  facts  pleaded  by	 the
appellant the  dispute was  an industrial dispute cognizable
only by an industrial court and not by a civil court.
     Allowing the appeal,
^
     HELD:(1) It  is not  quite correct to say that the suit
as filed  by the  appellant is	not maintainable at all in a
civil court.  The main	reliefs asked  for by  the appellant
which when  granted will  amount to  specific performance of
the contract  of service  and,	therefore,  they  cannot  be
granted. But  the appellant  in	 the  alternative  has	also
claimed for awarding compensation to him. [127A-C]
     (2) Reading  the plaint as a whole, it can legitimately
be culled out that the appellant had made out a case that he
was wrongfully	dismissed from service. This relief could be
granted by  the civil court if it found that the plaintiff's
case was  true. The  High Court was not right in saying that
no such	 case had  at all  been made  in the plaint. To this
limited extent	the matter  could be  examined by  the civil
court. [127D-E]
     Dr. S. B. Dutt v. University of Delhi, [1959] SCR 1236;
S. R.  Tewari v.  Distt. Board Agra & Anr., [1964] 3 SCR 55;
Indian Airlines Corp. v. Sukhdeo Rai, [1971] Suppl. SCR 510,
Premier Automobiles  Ltd. v.  Kamlekar	Shantaram  Wadke  of
Bombay & Ors., [1976] 1 SCR 427; referred to.



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Civil  Appeal No.  5  of
1969.
126
     From the  Judgment and  Order dated  20th June, 1968 of
the Bombay High Court in Appeal No. 48/66.
     K. Jayaram, Amicus Curiae for the Appellant.
     Y. S. Chitaley, M. V. Goswami and Ambrish Kumar for the
Respondent.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     UNTWALIA, J.-The  plaintiff-appellant filed  a suit  in
the  Trial   Court  in	 the  year   1963  alleging  certain
unjustifiable  and  illegal  actions  on  the  part  of	 his
employer, the respondent in this appeal. The reliefs claimed
in the suit were the following:-
	  "(a) That it	may be	declared that  the defendant
	       has  removed   the  plaintiff   from  service
	       illegally and without any reason.
	   (b) That it	may be	declared that  the defendant
	       failed  and   neglected	to   re-employ	 the
	       plaintiff although  the	defendant  restarted
	       the factory.
	  (c)  That the	 defendant be  ordered to  reinstate
	       the plaintiff  to his  former  job  with	 due
	       benefits and advantages.
	  (d)  In  the	alternative  the  defendant  may  be
	       ordered	to   pay  to   the  plaintiff	such
	       compensation as to the Hon'ble Court may deem
	       fit.
	  (e)  For costs of the suit.
	  (f)  For such	 further and  other reliefs  as this
	       Hon'ble Court may deem fit."
     On contest by the respondent, the Trial Court held that
the dispute  raised by the appellant was in the nature of an
industrial  dispute   and  hence  the  Civil  Court  had  to
jurisdiction to	 try it.  The appellant	 took the  matter in
appeal before  the First  Appellate Court.  It	allowed	 the
appeal and  held that  the dispute  raised was	of  a  civil
nature and  the case  was cognizable  by a  Civil Court. The
respondent filed the second appeal in the High Court and the
High Court  has agreed	with the view of the Trial Court. It
has said  that the  appellant had  not	claimed	 damages  by
pleading wrongful  dismissal and  breach of  the contract of
his service.  The facts pleaded by him all converged to show
that the  dispute was  an industrial dispute cognizable only
by an  industrial court	 and  not  by  a  Civil	 Court.	 The
appellant has  presented his  appeal  in  this	Court  by  a
certificate granted by the High Court.
127
     The Court is obliged to Mr. K. Jayaram for assisting it
as Amicus  Curiae in this case. After having appreciated the
entire facts  and the  circumstances of	 the case, we are of
the opinion  that it  is not  quite correct  to say that the
suit filed  by the appellant is not maintainable at all in a
Civil Court.  The correct  position of	law is that the main
reliefs asked  for by  him which when granted will amount to
specific  performance	of  the	  contract  of	service	 and
therefore they	cannot be  granted. There  are a  number  of
decisions of  this Court  to that  effect; to  wit-Dr. S. B.
Dutt v.	 University of	Delhi(1), S.  R. Tiwari	 v. District
Board Agra  & Anr.(2)  and Indian  Airlines  Corporation  v.
Sukhdeo	 Rai.(3)   Reference  was   also  be  made  in	this
connection  to	 the  decision	of  this  Court	 in  Premier
Automobiles Ltd.  v. Kamlekar  Shantaram Wadke of Bombay and
Ors.(4)
     But then  in the  alternative, the	 appellant had	also
prayed for  awarding compensation  to him.  And reading	 the
plaint as a whole, it can legitimately be culled out that he
had made  out a	 case, whether	it was right on fact or not,
that  is  a  different	question,  that	 he  was  wrongfully
dismissed from	service. This relief could be granted by the
Civil Court  if it found that the plaintiff's case was true.
The High  Court, in our opinion, is not right in saying that
no such	 case had at all been made out in the plaint. In our
opinion, as  we have  earlier said,  reading the plaint as a
whole, such  case can  be spelt	 out. That  being so to this
limited extent,	 the matter  could be  examined by the Civil
Court.
     We accordingly allow the appeal set aside the judgments
of the	courts below  and send	back the  case to  the Trial
Court for  disposing it	 of in	accordance with	 law in	 the
light of  this judgment. There will be no order as to costs.
Since the  suit has  become very  old, the  Trial  Court  is
directed to dispose it of as expeditiously as possible.
N.V.K.					     Appeal allowed.
128




