

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Rameshwar Prasad vs State Of Bihar And Ors on 31 August, 1979Equivalent citations: 1980 AIR  104, 1980 SCR  (1) 456
Author: S M Fazalali
Bench: Fazalali, Syed Murtaza
           PETITIONER:
RAMESHWAR PRASAD

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF BIHAR AND ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT31/08/1979

BENCH:
FAZALALI, SYED MURTAZA
BENCH:
FAZALALI, SYED MURTAZA
SHINGAL, P.N.
SEN, A.P. (J)

CITATION:
 1980 AIR  104		  1980 SCR  (1) 456
 1979 SCC  (4) 368


ACT:
     Supersession  for	 promotion  as	Additional  District
Judge-challenge under Constitution of India, Articles 14 and
16-When can arise.
     Malice-Plea of  malice not	 taken or  made out  in	 the
Petition cannot be taken notice of when argued.



HEADNOTE:
     The petitioner  challenged the  order of the High Court
recommending his  supersession by promoting other Sub-judges
as Additional  District	 Judges,  and  also  the  acceptance
thereof by  the Government,  on the ground that his judicial
career was  without any	 blemish and therefore, the impugned
orders were  in violation  of Articles	14  and	 16  of	 the
Constitution and  that there  was a  colour of malice in the
recommendation by the High Court.
     Dismissing the petition, the Court
^
     HELD: 1.  All that Article 16 requires is that the case
of  the	  employees  similarly	 situate  and  eligible	 for
promotion must be considered before others are promoted. The
petitioner must	 establish that	 his case was not considered
at all	and persons  junior to him were promoted without any
reason. [457D-E]
     In this  case, Article  16 is  not violated as his case
for promotion was fully considered by the High Court and the
Government an(l	 then it  was decided not to promote him. At
any rate,  since the  High Court  is the  best. judge of the
performance of	its officers  and if  the High Court was not
satisfied about	 the suitability  of the  Petitioner  having
regard to  his past  record, for  promotion Art.  16 is	 not
attracted and  this Court  would not, therefore interfere at
this state. [457B-C. 458A-B]
     (b) The  petitioner  and  other  Sub-judges  not  being
similarly situate  as being  of equal  merit the question of
discrimination	or   infraction	 of   Article  14   of	 the
Constitution also does not arise. [457H, 458AB]
     Supreme Court  cannot  take  notice  of  allegation  of
malice as  an argument	when no	 such plea has been taken in
the petition  or proved in the affidavit filed in support of
the petition. [458B]



JUDGMENT:
     ORIGINAL JURISDICTION: Writ Petition No. 4313 of 1978.
	   Under Article 32 of the Constitution.
     Sarjoo Prasad,  (Dr.) Y. S. Chitale and M. L. Verma for
the Petitioner.
     U. P. Singh and S. N. Jha for Respondent No. 1.
     S. V. Gupta and B. P. Singh for Respondent No. 2.
457
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     FAZAL ALI,	 J. This  petition under Article 32 has been
filed against  the order  of the Governor of Bihar accepting
recommendations	 of  the  High	Court  and  superseding	 the
petitioner Rameshwar  Prasad by	 promoting other subordinate
Judges as  Additional  District	 Judge,	 Mr.  Sarjoo  Prasad
appearing in  support of  the petitioner  mainly raised	 two
points before  us. In  the first place it was contended that
the judicial  career  of  the  petitioner  was	without	 any
blemish and  there was	nothing against	 him to	 justify his
supersession when  the High  Court recommended	the case  of
promotion of  the Sub-Judges  for appointment  as Additional
District Judge	and hence the order impugned is violative of
Article	 16  of	 the  Constitution.  There  is,	 how-  ever,
abundant material on the record to show that the case of the
petitioner was fully considered by the High Court and he was
not considered	fit for	 promotion by  the High Court, hence
his case  was not  recommended for  promotion as  Additional
District Judge.	 In this  view of  the matter it is manifest
that Article  16 cannot be violated because the petitioner's
case for  promotion was	 fully considered  by the High Court
and the	 Government and	 then it  was decided not to promote
him. All that Art. 16 requires is that the case of employees
similarly  situate   and  eligible  for	 promotion  must  be
considered before others are promoted. If it was established
that the  petitioner's case  was not  considered at  all and
persons junior	to him	were promoted  with- out any reason,
then something	could be  said in support of the petitioners
case. It  would appear	from the affidavit filed by the High
Court  that  the  Government  considered  the  case  of	 the
petitioner. The	 averment in  para 14 of the affidavit filed
by the High Court runs:
	  "It  is  incorrect  to  say  that  there  was	 any
     departure from any common usual practice in sending the
     second  proposal  though  final  orders  on  the  first
     proposal  were  not  passed  by  the  State  Government
     specially in  the context	that at	 the time of sending
     the second	 proposal this Respondent came to a definite
     conclusion that  the work and conduct of the petitioner
     was  such	 that  he  should  not	be  recommended	 for
     promotion unless he showed improvement in his conduct."
     G
     Further more  at page  85 of  Annexure I  it is clearly
mentioned that	the Court  has recommended the case of other
Sub-Judges after  considering  the  case  of  the  concerned
appellant Mr.  Rameshwar Prasad	 and it	 is also established
that the Government concurred with the recommendation of the
High  Court.   Although	 Mr.   Prasad  submitted   that	 the
petitioner had	an  unblemished	 career,  there	 are  enough
materials on  the record  to show  that this is not correct.
Thus the petitioner and
458
other Sub-Judges  not being  similarly situate	as being  of
equal merit  the question of discrimination or infraction of
Article 14  of the  Constitution also does not arise. At any
rate, since  the  High	Court  is  the	best  Judge  of	 the
performance of	its officers  and if  the High Court was not
satisfied about	 the suitability  of the  petitioner  having
regard to  his past  record, for  promotion, Art.  16 is not
attracted and  this Court would not, therefore, interfere at
this stage.  Secondly, it  was faintly	suggested that there
was a  colour of  malice in the recommendation by the  Court
but no	such clear  plea has  been taken  in the petition or
proved in  the affidavit  filed by  the petitioner. In these
circumstances,	we   cannot  take  any	notice	of  such  an
allegation. For	 these reasons,	 we find  no merit  in	this
petition. We  would, however,  like to observe that the High
Court itself  was of the opinion that in case the petitioner
improves his  merit and	 ability, he  may be  considered for
promotion  and	 for  this  purpose  one  vacancy  was	kept
reserved. Although  this vacancy  has since  been filled up,
yet if	in future  there is  any vacancy, the High Court may
consider his case for promotion, if he shows improvement and
progress.
     The application is accordingly dismissed. There will be
no order as to costs.
S.R.					  Petition dismissed
459




