

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Anand Narain Shukla vs State Of Madhya Pradesh on 2 August, 1979Equivalent citations: 1979 AIR 1923, 1980 SCR  (2) 196
Author: N Untwalia
Bench: Untwalia, N.L.
           PETITIONER:
ANAND NARAIN SHUKLA

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH

DATE OF JUDGMENT02/08/1979

BENCH:
UNTWALIA, N.L.
BENCH:
UNTWALIA, N.L.
SEN, A.P. (J)

CITATION:
 1979 AIR 1923		  1980 SCR  (2) 196
 1980 SCC  (1) 252
 CITATOR INFO :
 R	    1981 SC 858	 (4)


ACT:
     Second departmental  enquiry not a bar on the ground it
was held on basis of the same charges of first enquiry which
was  quashed   on  technical  and  legal  ground-Subsistence
allowance paid	during suspension  could be allowed to stand
in the order of reversion.



HEADNOTE:
     The appellant, an office Superintendent was reverted to
a lower	 rank after  finding him guilty of some charges held
in a  departmental enquiry.  The said orders were quashed by
the High  Court on  the ground that the enquiry held was not
proper and  legal. The	appellant was  reinstated as  office
superintendent.	 Later,	 fresh	enquiry	 was  started  after
placing him  under suspension  on the  basis of the same old
charges. He  was found	guilty and  again reverted  to lower
rank with  a direction	in the	order of  reversion that the
allowance paid	to him during the period of suspension could
remain intact.	The writ  petition filed  by  the  appellant
against the said orders was dismissed.
     Dismissing the appeal by certificate, the Court
^
     HELD: 1.  The observations	 of this  Court in  State of
Assam &	 Anr. v.  J. N. Ray Biswas [1976] 2 SCR p. 128 @ 130
to the	effect that "once a disciplinary case has closed and
the official  reinstated, presumably  on full exoneration, a
chagrinned Government  cannot restart  the exercise  in	 the
absence of  a specific	power to review or revise, vested by
rules in  some authority"  are not applicable to the fact of
the Present case. [197 G-H]
     The earlier  order was  quashed on	 a technical ground.
The  order   of	 reinstatement	does  not  bring  about	 any
distinction in	that regard. The Government had to pass that
order because  the  earlier  order  of	reversion  had	been
quashed by the High Court. Without reinstating the appellant
it would  have been  difficult, perhaps unlawful, to start a
fresh enquiry against the appellant. [197F-G]
     (b) The  reduced amount  paid to  the appellant for the
period of suspension was affirmed by making in a part of the
order of reversion itself, and is in order. [197H, 198H]



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Civil  Appeal No. 467 of
1970.
     From the  Judgment and  order dated  25-4-1969  of	 the
Madhya Pradesh High Court in Misc. Petition No. 4/67.
     D. N. Mukherjee and G. S. Chatterjee for the Appellant.
     S. K.  Gambhir, R.	 Nath and  Miss Ram Rakhiani for the
Respondent.
197
     The order of the Court was delivered by
     UNTWALIA, J.-The appellant was an office Superintendent
in the	office of  Agriculture Department.  Certain  charges
were levelled  against him.  An enquiry	 was purported to be
held. After  finding him  guilty of  some  charges,  he	 was
reverted to a lower rank. He challenged that order by filing
a Writ Petition in the Madhya Pradesh High Court . That Writ
Petition was  allowed and the order of reversion was quashed
on the	ground that  the enquiry  held was  not	 proper	 and
legal. In view of the order of the High Court, the appellant
was   reinstated    in	 his   original	  post	 of   office
Superintendent.	 But   shortly	after,	 he  was  put  under
suspension and	fresh proceedings  were started on the basis
of the	same old  charges. In the second proceedings, he has
been found  guilty of  certain charges, the details of which
are not	 necessary to  be mentioned  in our judgment. He was
again reverted	and it	was also directed in the order	that
the allowance  paid to	him during  the period of suspension
could remain  intact. The  appellant  filed  a	second	Writ
Petition in  the High  Court to challenge the fresh order of
reversion. The	High Court  has dismissed his Writ Petition.
Hence this appeal in this Court on grant of a certificate by
the High Court.
     Mr. D.  N. Mukherjee, learned counsel for the appellant
urged only  two points before us; (1) that after the earlier
order of  reversion was	 quashed by the High Court and after
the appellant  was reinstated, no second enquiry on the very
same charges  could be held and no second order of reversion
could be legally and validly ', made; and (2) that appellant
was  entitled	to  the	  full	salary	for  the  period  of
suspension.
     We find  no substance  in either of the points urged on
behalf of  the appellant.  The earlier	order was quashed on
the technical  ground. On  merits, a second enquiry could be
held. It  was rightly  held. The order of reinstatement does
not  bring   about  any	 distinction  in  that	regard.	 The
Government had	to pass that order because the earlier order
of reversion  had been	quashed by  the High  Court. Without
reinstating the	 appellant, it	would  have  been  difficult
perhaps unlawful,  to start  a	fresh  enquiry	against	 the
appellant. The	observations  of  this	Court  in  the	last
paragraph of  the judgment in State of Assam & Anr. v. J. N.
Roy Biswas  are not  applicable to  the facts of the present
case and do not help the appellant at all.
     The reduced amount paid to the appellant for the period
of suspension  was affirmed by making it a part of the order
of reversion
198
itself. That being so, the second point urged by the counsel
is also,  of no substance. For the reasons, stated above, we
dismiss this  appeal but  since the,  appellant has  already
retired from service, we make no order as to costs.
V.D.K.					   Appeal dismissed.
199




