

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Sharif Ahmed vs State Of U.P on 22 August, 1979Equivalent citations: 1979 AIR 1917, 1980 SCR  (2) 312
Author: V Krishnaiyer
Bench: Krishnaiyer, V.R.
           PETITIONER:
SHARIF AHMED

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF U.P.

DATE OF JUDGMENT22/08/1979

BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
SHINGAL, P.N.

CITATION:
 1979 AIR 1917		  1980 SCR  (2) 312
 1979 SCC  (4) 412


ACT:
     Policy of	Prohibition under  the	Prevention  of	Food
Adulteration Act-Non  mention in  the Analyst's report to be
injurious to  human life does not amount that the adulterant
is non-injurious-Setting  aside the sentence already reduced
by  High   Court  under	 a  misconception  would  amount  to
following a wrong path.



HEADNOTE:
     HELD: The	prohibition under  the	Prevention  of	Food
Adulteration Act  and the  Rules has been imposed because it
is harmful to human health. [312 G]
     Absence  of  evidence  is	not  equal  to	evidence  of
absence. Non-mention in the Public Analyst's report that the
"colour	 which	 was  mixed   with  powdered  Chillies"	 was
injurious to  human life  does not  amount to the adulterant
being  non-injurious.	When  the   High  Court	 under	this
misconception has  already reduced  the sentence, this Court
cannot under  Art. 136	of the	Constitution be	 pressurised
further to follow the wrong path. [312 F-H]



JUDGMENT:
     CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Special Leave Petition
(Crl.) No. 2088 of 1979.
     From the  Judgment and  Order dated  25-7-1979  of	 the
Allahabad High Court in Criminal Revision No. 1189/79.
     N. Ali Khan and A. D. Mathur for the Petitioner
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     KRISHNA IYER, J.-Counsel for the petitioner states that
the sentence  imposed upon  his client for the offence under
section 7  read with  section 16  of the  Prevention of Food
Adulteration Act  must be  reduced because  the	 adulterant,
namely, prohibited coal-tar dye, is, in his submission, non-
injurious or  an innocent  mix. Therefore,  the imprisonment
part of the sentence, it was urged, should be eliminated. It
is true	 that the  High Court  has observed that the "colour
which was  mixed with powdered chillies" is not mentioned in
the Public  Analyst's report  to be injurious to human life.
It does	 not follow  that because  it  is  not	specifically
mentioned to  be injurious,  it is non-injurious. Absence of
evidence is  not equal	to evidence of absence. For ought we
know, the  prohibition under  the Act and the Rules has been
imposed because	 it is	harmful to  human health. It is true
that the High Court has, under a mis-conception, reduced the
sentence,  but	 we  cannot   be  pressurised  further	into
following the  wrong path.  The special	 leave	petition  is
dismissed.
V.D.K.					 Petition dismissed.
313




