

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Inderjeet vs State Of Uttar Pradesh & Anr on 10 August, 1979Equivalent citations: 1979 AIR 1867, 1980 SCR  (1) 255
Author: V Krishnaiyer
Bench: Krishnaiyer, V.R.
           PETITIONER:
INDERJEET

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH & ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT10/08/1979

BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
SHINGAL, P.N.

CITATION:
 1979 AIR 1867		  1980 SCR  (1) 255
 1979 SCC  (4) 246
 CITATOR INFO :
 R	    1989 SC1011	 (14)


ACT:
     Statutory standardised sentence-Absolute liability with
mandatory minimum sentence of six months' R.I. of offender's
guilt of  sale of adulterated food, whether constitutionally
bad, offending	Articles 14,  19 and  21-Prevention of	Food
Adulteration Act, Section 7 read with Section 16, vires of.
     Dismissing the Writ Petition, the Court



HEADNOTE:
     HELD: Section  7 read with Section 16 of the Prevention
of Food Adulteration Act is constitutionally valid. [257G]
     Policy is	for Parliament, constitutionality is for the
Court. Protection of public health and regulation of noxious
trade  belong	to  the	  police  power	 of  the  State	 and
Legislation like  the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act is
of that genre. [256F-G]
     If a  sentence, as in the instant Act, is prescribed as
a mandatory  minimum and  that is  too cruel to comport with
Art. 21	 and too torturesome to be reasonably justifiable or
socially defensible  under  Article  19,  then	a  case	 for
judicial review may arise. [256 G-H]
     Judge-proof sentencing  is not  per se  bad.  Sometimes
judicial  fluctuations	in  punishment,	 especially  on	 the
softer side  where  white  collar  criminals  are  involved,
induce legislative  standardization of	sentences, to  avoid
giving societal protection in hostage to fortune. There is a
wide play still left for the Court, and mandatory minima are
familiar from the days of the Penal Code. [256H, 257A]
     The prescription  of equal	 protection is	not breached
either, because	 within the range of judicial discretion the
Court deals  out to  each  what	 he  deserves  according  to
established principles. [257B]
Observation
	  (a)  Public	authorities   entrusted	  with	 the
	       enforcement  of	 regulatory  provisions	  to
	       protect society may, in proper cases, examine
	       those prosecutions  which are  harassments to
	       the humbler  folk even  if  they	 technically
	       violate the  law and  cause only minimal harm
	       to society  and decide whether they should at
	       all sanction their prosecution. [257D-E]
	  (b)  The Legislature,	 in  its  wisdom,  may	also
	       consider the  advisability of  resting  power
	       somewhere to  reduce the sentence without the
	       bigger offender	escaping through these wider
	       meshes meant  for the smaller offenders. Even
	       otherwise, there	 is a  general power  in the
	       Executive to commute sentences and such power
	       can be  put into action on a principled basis
	       when small  men get caught by the law. [257E-
	       F]
256



JUDGMENT:
     ORIGINAL JURISDICTION: Writ Petition No. 449 of 1979
     (Under Article 32 of the Constitution)
     R. K. Garg and D. K. Garg for the Petitioner.
     The Order of the Court was delivered by
     KRISHNA	IYER,	 J.-The	   adventurous	  petitioner
imaginatively challenges  the vires  of Section	 7 read with
Section 16  of the  Prevention of  Food Adulteration Act and
the relevant  rules framed  thereunder. The  gravamen of his
charge is  that the  above provisions, read together, impose
an  inflexible	minimum	 sentence  of  six  months  R.I.  of
offender's guilty  of sale of adulterated food, excluding in
the process  even the need to prove mens rea in the accused.
This absolute  liability, with mandatory sentence, dependent
on sophisticated chemical tests and complicated formulae, is
oppressively  unreasonable   in	 the   illiterate,  agrestic
realities of  little  Indian  retail  trade.  Such,  in	 one
sentence, is the submission of counsel.
     The primary  props to support this broad submission may
be briefly  noticed. Counsel  complains	 that  there  is  no
classification as between injurious pollutants and innocuous
adulterants while proscribing the sentence. Nor is there any
intelligent differentiation  between petty dealers and giant
offenders, and	vendors, big  and  small,  are	put  on	 the
Procrustean bed	 of stern  punishment alike. Articles 14, 19
and 21	are the constitutional artillery employed by counsel
to shoot down the said provisions of the Act.
     Frankly, we  are not  impressed with  the consternation
about  the  constitutionality  even  if	 the  potential	 for
victimisation affecting	 smaller  people  may  be  real	 and
elicit our  commiseration. We  may dwell for a moment on the
latter grievance  against the  law a little later. First, we
will repel the vice of unconstitutionality.
     Let us  be	 clear	about  the  basics.  Policy  is	 for
Parliament, constitutionality  for the	Court. Protection of
public health  and regulation of noxious trade belong to the
police	power	of  the	  State	 and  legislation  like	 the
Prevention of Food Adulteration Act is of that genre.
     If a  sentence, as	 here, is  prescribed as a mandatory
minimum and  that is  too cruel	 to comport with Art. 21 and
too torturesome	 to be	reasonably justifiable	or  socially
defensible under Art. 19 then a case for judicial review may
arise. But  we see  none here.	Nor can we agree that judge-
proof sentencing is per se bad. Sometimes judicial
257
fluctuations in	 punishment, especially	 on the	 softer side
where  white   collar	criminals   are	  involved,   induce
legislative standardisation  of sentences,  to avoid  giving
societal protection  in hostage	 to fortune. There is a wide
play still  left for  the court,  and mandatory	 minima	 are
familiar from  the days	 of the	 Penal Code (Vide Sec. 302).
The prescription of equal protection is not breached either,
because within	the range  of judicial	discretion the court
deals out  to each what he deserves according to established
principles.
     Shri R.  K. Garg  feelingly urged that the poor and the
weak, who  are the  larger, lower  sector of retail traders,
will have  to suffer  the standardised	imprisonment if Food
Inspectors can	challan them  in Court	and, on	 some  minor
variation in the chemical composition of food sold, get them
convicted sans	mens rea  merely because,  along the  chain,
some bigger  trader has	 fobbed off  inferior commodities on
them. We  are disturbed	 that it  is possible that small men
become the  victims of	harsh law when there is no executive
policy	which	guides	prosecution   of  offenders.   Petty
victuallers and	 big sharks  operate on society in different
degrees and  draconian equality will be tempered by flexible
policy.
     This is  a matter	of penal policy in constitutionality
and so it is, in a sense, out of bounds for judicial advice.
Even  so,   we	feel   constrained  to	 state	that  public
authorities entrusted  with the	 enforcement  of  regulatory
provisions to  protect society may, in proper cases, examine
those prosecutions which are harassments to the humbler folk
even if	 they technically  violate the	law and	 cause	only
minimal harm  to society  and decide  whether they should at
all sanction  their prosecution.  The  Legislature,  in	 its
wisdom, may  also consider the advisability of resting power
somewhere to reduce the sentence without the bigger offender
escaping through  these wider  meshes meant  for the smaller
offenders. Even	 otherwise, there  is a general power in the
Executive to  commute sentences	 and such  power can  be put
into action  on a principled basis when small men get caught
by the law.
     We	 dismiss   the	Writ  petition	since  there  is  no
constitutional invalidity made out and the grounds urged are
more appropriately  an appeal  to  the	Parliament  and	 the
Executive.
V.D.K.					 Petition dismissed.
258




