

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Baidyanath Ayurveda Bhawan ... vs Management Of Shri Baidyanath ... on 24 November, 1983Equivalent citations: 1984 AIR  457, 1984 SCR  (1) 927
Author: M Rangnath
Bench: Misra Rangnath
           PETITIONER:
BAIDYANATH AYURVEDA BHAWAN MAZDOOR UNION, PATNA

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
MANAGEMENT OF SHRI BAIDYANATH AYURVEDA BHAWAN PVT. LTD. &ORS

DATE OF JUDGMENT24/11/1983

BENCH:
MISRA RANGNATH
BENCH:
MISRA RANGNATH
DESAI, D.A.
MISRA, R.B. (J)

CITATION:
 1984 AIR  457		  1984 SCR  (1) 927
 1984 SCC  (1) 279	  1983 SCALE  (2)814


ACT:
     Payment of Bonus Act 1965
     Act whether  exhaustive on	 the law  relating to bonus-
`Attendance bonus' being paid prior to Act-Employees whether
entitled to  `attendance bonus'	 over and above profit bonus
payable under the Act.



HEADNOTE:
     The workmen  working in  the establishment of the first
respondent were	 being paid `attendance bonus'. The question
whether the  workmen were entitled to payment of bonus under
the  Payment   of  Bonus  Act,	1965,  over  and  above	 the
`attendance  bonus'   was  referred  to	 adjudication  under
Section 10 of the Industrial Disputes Act 1947. The Tribunal
held in	 favour of  the workmen.  Before the  High Court the
employer contended  that when bonus was being paid under the
Act the	 workmen were  not entitled  to separate `attendance
bonus'. The  High Court,  relying on  the decision  of	this
Court in  Sanghi Jeevaraj  Ghewar Chand & Ors. v. Secretary,
Madras Chillies,  Grains Kirana	 Merchants Workers'  Union &
Anr. (1969)  1 S.C.R.  366 held	 that the  workmen were	 not
entitled to payment of `attendance bonus'.
     Allowing the appeal,
^
     HELD:  1.	 Both  the   Tribunal  and  the	 High  Court
concurrently held  that the workmen in the establishment had
been receiving	`attendance bonus'  from before. `Attendance
bonus' being  outside the purview of the Bonus Act, the High
Court was  not right  in vacating the award of the Tribunal.
[928 E-F, 931 A]
     2. In  Ghewar Chand's  case on  which  the	 High  Court
relied, the  question was  not whether	after the  Bonus Act
came into  force, the  other types  of bonus  hitherto	paid
caused to  be payable. This question was directly considered
in Mumbai  Kamgar Sabha, Bombay v M/s Abdulbhai Faizullabhai
 & Ors.(1976) 3	 SCR 591  and  held  that  the	Act  leaves
untouched customary bonus. [929 A-B, 930 H]
     3. In  the	 instant  case,	 if  the  employer  had	 not
challenged the	award the workmen would have had the benefit
of the	bonus more  than a  decade back.  That justifies the
awarding of interest at 9% per annum. [931 B-C]
928



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION : Civil Appeal No. 1851 of
1974.
     Appeal by	Special Leave  from the	 Judgment and  Order
dated the  24th October,  1973 of  the Patna  High Court  in
C.W.J.C. No. 613 of 1970.
     R.K. Garg and V.J. Francis for the Appellant.
     L.C. Goyal for the Respondents.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     RANGANATH MISRA,  J. This	appeal by  special leave  is
directed against  the  decision	 of  the  Patna	 High  Court
quashing an  award of  the Industrial  Tribunal of  Bihar in
exercise  of   jurisdiction  under   Article  227   of	 the
Constitution and the workmen's union has carried the appeal.
     Two  disputes   were  referred  to	 adjudication  under
section 10  of the Industrial Disputes Act but the appeal is
confined  to  only  one,  viz.,	 "whether  the	workmen	 are
entitled to  payment of bonus for the year 1966-67 under the
Payment of  Bonus Act  over and above the `attendance bonus'
which is  being paid  in this  establishment?  If  so,	what
should be the quantum of bonus?" The Tribunal found that the
workmen were entitled to attendance bonus over and above the
bonus payable under the Payment of Bonus Act, 1965 (`Act for
short), and  specified the  amount  as	required  under	 the
reference. The employer challenged the Award before the High
Court and  contended that  no separate	attendance bonus was
payable when  bonus was being paid under the Act. A Division
Bench of  the High  Court came	to hold, concurring with the
Tribunal, that	the workmen  in the  establishment had	been
receiving attendance  bonus from  before  and  proceeded  to
examine whether	 such attendance  bonus was  included in the
bonus payable  to the  workmen under  the Act  or  could  be
claimed over  and above	 the statutory bonus. Relying on the
observations of this Court in Sanghi Jeevaraj Ghewar Chand &
Ors. v.	 Secretary, Madras Chillies, Grains Kirana Merchants
Worker's Union	& Anr.(1),  the Court came to the conclusion
that the  workmen were not entitled to payment of attendance
bonus for  the year  1966-67  and  accordingly	vacated	 the
Award.
929
     In Ghewar	Chand's case  (supra) as rightly observed by
the High  Court	 the  question	for  consideration  was	 not
whether after  the Act	came into  force and statutory bonus
became payable, other types of bonus hitherto paid ceased to
be payable. On the other hand, in a later case Mumbai Kamgar
Sabha, Bombay v. M/s. Abdulbhai Faizullabhai & Ors.(2). this
Court considered  the question directly. The later case also
referred to Ghewar Chand's case and ultimately held:
	  "It is  clear further	 from the  long title of the
     Bonus Act of 1965 that it seeks to provide for bonus to
     persons employed `in certain establishments' not in all
     establishments.  Moreover,	 customary  bonus  does	 not
     require  calculation  of  profits,	 available  surplus,
     because it	 is a  payment founded	on  long  usage	 and
     justified often  by spending  on festivals	 and the Act
     gives no guidance to fix the quantum of festival bonus;
     nor does it expressly wish such a usage. The conclusion
     seems to  be fairly  clear, unless	 we strain  judicial
     sympathy contrariwise,  that the  Bonus Act  dealt with
     only profit  bonus and  matters connected therewith and
     did not  govern customary,	 traditional or	 contractual
     bonus."
Referring to  Ghewar Chand's  case, Krishna Iyer, J. in this
latter case indicated :
	  "...so  viewed,   we	are   able  to	 discern  no
     impediment in  reading  Ghewar  Chand  as	confined  to
     profit-bonus, leaving  room for  non-statutory play  of
     customary bonus.  The case	 dealt with a bonus claim by
     two sets  of workmen,  based on  profit of the business
     but  the	workmen	 fell	outside	 the  ambit  of	 the
     legislation by  express exclusion or exemption. Nothing
     relating to any other type of bonus arose and cannot be
     impliedly held  to have  been  decided.  The  governing
     principle we  have	 to  appreciate	 as  a	key  to	 the
     understanding of  Ghewar Chand  is that it relates to a
     case  of	profit	bonus  urged  under  the  Industrial
     Disputes Act  by  two  sets  of  workmen,	employed  by
     establishments which  are either  excluded or  exempted
     from the Bonus Act. The major
930
     inarticulate premise  of the  statute is  that it deals
     with-and  only  with-profit-based	bonus  as  has	been
     explained	at   some  length   earlier.  There   is  no
     categorical provision  in the  Bonus Act nullifying all
     other kinds  of bonus, nor does such a conclusion arise
     by necessary  implication, The  ruling undoubtedly lays
     down the law thus:
	       `Considering the	 history of the legislation,
	  the background  and the circumstances in which the
	  Act was  enacted, the	 object of  the Act  and its
	  scheme,  it	is  not	  possible  to	 accept	 the
	  construction	 suggested    on   behalf   of	 the
	  respondents that  the Act is not an exhaustive Act
	  dealing comprehensively with the subject-matter of
	  bonus in  all its aspects or that Parliament still
	  left it  open to  those to  whom the	Act does not
	  apply by  reason of  its provisions  either as  to
	  exclusion or	exemption to  raise a  dispute	with
	  regard to  bonus through  industrial	adjudication
	  under	 the   Industrial  Disputes   Act  or  other
	  corresponding law'.
     But this  statement, contextually construed, means that
     profit-bonus not founded on the provisions of the Bonus
     Act and by resort to an adventure in industrial dispute
     under  the	  Industrial  Disputes	 Act  is  no  longer
     permissible. When	Parliament has expressly excluded or
     exempted certain  categories from	the Bonus  Act, they
     are  bowled   out	so  far	 as  profit-based  bonus  is
     concerned.	 You  cannot  resurrect	 profit-bonus  by  a
     backdoor method,  viz., resort  to the machinery of the
     Industrial Disputes Act."
     Upon a  further analysis  of Ghewar Chand's case. Iyer,
J. concluded by saying:
	  "A discerning	 and concrete analysis of the scheme
     of the  Act and the reasoning of the Court leaves us in
     no doubt that it leaves untouched customary bonus."
     We concur with this conclusion.
931
     On the  finding by	 the Tribunal as also the High Court
that attendance	 bonus was  being paid	from before  and  it
being outside the purview of the Act, the High Court was not
right in  vacating the	 Award.	 The appeal must succeed and
the award  on this score has to be restored. If the employer
had not challenged the Award, the workmen would have had the
benefit of the bonus more than a decade back. That justifies
awarding of  interest. While  allowing	the  appeal  of	 the
workmen with  costs, we	 direct that the amount found by the
Tribunal for  being given  as attendance  bonus shall  carry
interest at  the rate of 9% per annum from the due date till
disbursement. Hearing fee is assessed at Rs. 2,000.
N.V.K.					     Appeal allowed.
932




