

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Hindustani Andolan & Ors vs State Of Punjab & Ors on 24 November, 1983Equivalent citations: 1984 AIR  582, 1984 SCR  (1) 902
Author: Y Chandrachud
Bench: Chandrachud, Y.V. ((Cj)
           PETITIONER:
HINDUSTANI ANDOLAN & ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF PUNJAB & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT24/11/1983

BENCH:
CHANDRACHUD, Y.V. ((CJ)
BENCH:
CHANDRACHUD, Y.V. ((CJ)
SEN, AMARENDRA NATH (J)
THAKKAR, M.P. (J)

CITATION:
 1984 AIR  582		  1984 SCR  (1) 902
 1984 SCC  (1) 204	  1983 SCALE  (2)855


ACT:
     Writ jurisdiction of Court-Court cannot issue a general
writ of	 mandamus that	whenever a  criminal is suspected to
have taken  shelter in	a place	 of worship, the police must
enter that place.



HEADNOTE:
     HELD: It  is the  executive which	has to take a policy
decision as  regards the  steps	 to  be	 taken	in  a  given
situation, after  taking into  account the  demands  of	 the
prevailing situation.  It is  not that	the police should be
silent spectators  to wanton  destruction of  life; but	 the
Court cannot  commend that  the police	must enter places of
worship forcibly. [902 H; 903 A]



JUDGMENT:
     ORIGINAL JURISDICTION: Writ Petition (Crl.) No. 2989 of
1983.
	   (Under article 32 of the Constitution)
     R.L. Panjwani,  Manoj Saxena  and R.D. Upadhaya for the
petitioners.
     The Order of the Court was delivered by
     CHANDRACHUD, C.J,	The question raised in this petition
is whether  the Government can ask the police not to enter a
place of  worship, even	 if criminals  are  reported  to  be
hiding	or   harboured	therein.   It  is   impossible	 and
undesirable for	 any  Court  to	 issue	a  general  writ  of
Mandamus to the effect that whenever a criminal is suspected
to have taken shelter in a place of worship, the police must
enter that place, regardless of the overall situation of law
and order. Speaking generally, Courts cannot enforce law and
order by  issuing general  directions without  reference  to
specific instances.  The Government  has to  assess, in	 the
context of  the prevailing  conditions, the  impact  of	 the
steps taken  to enforce	 law  and  order.  And,	 it  is	 the
executive which has to take a policy decision as regards the
steps to be taken in a given situation, after
903
taking into account the demands of the prevailing situation.
We do  not commend  or suggest	that the  police  should  be
silent spectators  to wanton  destruction  of  life  but  we
cannot, as  men of  some little	 experience of law and life,
commend	 that  the  police  must  enter	 places	 of  worship
forcibly. While	 enforcing  law	 and  order,  the  executive
cannot be  oblivious of	 the possibility  that while solving
one problem of law and order, others more acute than the one
sought to  be solved  may arise.  That is always a valid and
relevant consideration.
     With these observations, we dismiss this petition filed
by   two   public-spirited   organisations   through   their
courageous convenor and secretary respectively.
M.L.C.					 Petition dismissed.
904




