

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Bhagirath Sinh S/O Mahipat Singh ... vs State Of Gujarat on 21 November, 1983Equivalent citations: 1984 AIR  372, 1984 SCR  (1) 839
Author: D Desai
Bench: Desai, D.A.
           PETITIONER:
BHAGIRATH SINH S/O MAHIPAT SINGH JUDEJA

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF GUJARAT

DATE OF JUDGMENT21/11/1983

BENCH:
DESAI, D.A.
BENCH:
DESAI, D.A.
MISRA, R.B. (J)

CITATION:
 1984 AIR  372		  1984 SCR  (1) 839
 1984 SCC  (1) 284	  1983 SCALE  (2)818
 CITATOR INFO :
 D	    1985 SC 969	 (12)


ACT:
     Criminal Procedure-Bail-For  cancellation of  bail very
cogent and overwhelming circumstances are necessary.
     Practice-Bail granted  by	Sessions  Judge	 by  a	well
reasoned order-Set  aside by  High  Court-Supreme  Court  to
interfere  if	approach  adopted   by	High  Court  is	 not
commending.



HEADNOTE:
     The appellant,  against whom  an offence under sec. 307
I.P.C. had  been registered  for giving	 knife	blows  to  a
person	was   granted  bail   by  the	Sessions  Judge.  On
application by	the State,  a Single Judge of the High Court
cancelled the bail. Hence this appeal by special leave.
     Allowing the appeal,
^
     HELD: Very	 cogent and  overwhelming circumstances	 are
necessary for  an order seeking cancellation of the bail and
the trend  today is  towards granting bail because it is now
well-settled that  the power  to grant	bail is	 not  to  be
exercised  as  if  the	punishment  before  trail  is  being
imposed.  The	only  material	 considerations	 in  such  a
situation are whether the accused would be readily available
for his	 trial	and  whether  he  is  likely  to  abuse	 the
discretion granted in his favour by tampering with evidence.
[842 D-E]
     In the instant case the order made by the High Court is
conspicuous  by	  its  silence	 on   these   two   relevant
considerations. The  learned Judge  was impressed by some of
the most  irrelevant considerations and misdirected himself.
The circumstances  found by him that the victim attacked was
a social  and political	 worker could  not be  considered so
overriding as  to permit interference by the High Court with
the discretionary order of the Sessions Judge granting bail.
The High  Court completely  overlooked the  fact that it was
not for	 it to decide whether the bail should be granted but
the application	 before it was for cancellation on the bail.
[842 B-C]



JUDGMENT:
     CRIMINAL APPELLATE	 JURISDICTION: Criminal	 Appeal	 No.
658 of 1983.
840
     Appeal by	Special leave  from the	 Judgment and  Order
dated the  21st October,  1983 of  the Gujarat High Court in
Criminal Misc. Application No. 1724 of 1983.
     Vimal Dave for the Appellant.
     M. N.  Phadke, R.	N. Poddar,  Girish Chandra and C. V.
Subba Rao for the Respondent.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     DESAI, J. Special Leave granted.
     Ordinarily this Court is not inclined to interfere with
the orders  either granting  or refusing to grant bail to an
accused person	either facing a criminal trial or whose case
after conviction  is pending in appeal. However, this is not
a case	where bail  is granted	or  refused  but  the  order
granting the  bail by  the learned  Sessions Judge  was	 set
aside by  the High Court adopting an approach which does not
commend to us.
     It is  alleged that  the appellant	 gave blows  with  a
knife to  one Popatlal	Sorathia, who  had come	 to visit an
indoor patient	Navalsinh Bhatti  on August  17, 1983 around
9.45 A.M.  Appellant was  accosted by the policemen on duty.
An offence  under Sec. 307 I.P.C. was registered against him
and  the   appellant  was   taken  into	  custody  and	 was
subsequently remanded  to judicial  custody. An	 application
for releasing him on bail was made on August 22, 1983 to the
Chief  Judicial	  Magistrate,  Rajkot.	The  Chief  Judicial
Magistrate, Rajkot  was pleased	 to dismiss  the same by his
order dated August 29, 1983.
     On the  same day,	an  application	 for  releasing	 the
appellant on  bail was	moved before  the  learned  Sessions
Judge. A notice was issued to the learned Public Prosecutor.
After hearing  both the sides, the learned Sessions Judge by
a  well-reasoned   order  directed  that  the  appellant  be
released on bail on his furnishing security in the amount of
Rs. 5000 and personal bond of the like amount.
     It	 appears   that	  the	State	of   Gujarat   filed
Miscellaneous Criminal	Application No.	 1724 of 1983 in the
High Court  of Gujarat	seeking cancellation  of  the  order
granting bail  to the  appellant. A  learned Single Judge of
the High Court held that once a prima facie case is
841
established, the  learned Sessions Judge ought to have taken
into  consideration   the  nature   and	  gravity   of	 the
circumstances in which the  offence is committed. The charge
against the  appellant is  that he  has committed an offence
punishable under  Sec. 307 I.P.C. and Sec. 135 of the Bombay
Police Act  and even  on the  date of hearing of this appeal
before us  on November 18, 1983, the Court-was informed that
the victim is alive and at present there is no danger to his
life. Nearly  3 months	have rolled  by from the date of the
offence. We fail to understand what the learned Judge of the
High Court  desires to convey when he says that once a prima
facie case  is established, it is necessary for the court to
examine the nature and gravity of the circumstances in which
the offence  was committed.  If there is no prima facie case
there is  no question of considering other circumstances But
even where  a prima  facie case is established, the approach
of the	court in  the matter of bail is not that the accused
should be  detained by	way of	punishment but	 whether the
presence of  the accused   would  be readily  available	 for
trial or that he is likely   to abuse the discretion grained
in his	favour by  tampering with  evidence. We	 would	have
certainly overlooked  this  aspect  of	the  matter  if	 the
approach of  the learned judge was otherwise one which would
commend	  to us.  It however  appears that the learned judge
was impressed  by some of the most irrelevant considerations
which prima  facie emerge from the following observations of
the learned judge which permits his whole order running into
about 13 pages.
     Says the learned judge:
	  "The learned	Judge ought  to have  seen the	fact
     that the  helpless victim	had gone to the hospital for
     pre-operation check-up.  He was  a leading	 social	 and
     political	   worker.  He	was  an	 active	 worker	 and
     Secretary	of  "Gundagiri	Nivaran	 Samiti"  which	 had
     raised a  campaign	 against  the  atrocities  allegedly
     having  been  committed  by  the  Rajputs	of  Girasiya
     community. Admittedly  the respondent  is Girasiya	 and
     the complainant  who was an active worker and Secretary
     of Gundagiri  Nivaran Samiti had become a victim at the
     hands of  the respondent.	The learned  Judge ought  to
     have taken	 into consideration  the material  fact that
     the incident  had taken  place in	the premises  of the
     Hospital which  may terrorize  a number of sick persons
     who might be getting treatment in the hospital."
842
     At another	 place, the  learned Judge has observed that
the learned  Sessions Judge  has ignored,  the fact  that  a
social and  political worker  was attacked  in the  hospital
premises with  a knife	having 9"  blade and  as many as 1 l
injuries were caused to a helpless victim.
     In our  opinion, the  learned  Judge  appears  to	have
misdirected  himself   while  examining	  the  question	  of
directing  cancellation	  of  bail  by	interfering  with  a
discretionary order  made by the learned Sessions Judge. One
could have  appreciated the  anxiety of the learned Judge of
the High  Court that  in the circumstances found by him that
the victim  attacked was  a social  and political worker and
therefore the  accused should  not be,	granted bail  but we
fail  to   appreciate  how   that  circumstance	  should  be
considered so  overriding as  to permit	 interference with a
discretionary order  of the  learned Sessions Judge granting
bail. The  High Court completely overlooked the fact that it
was not	 for it to decide whether the bail should be granted
but the	 application before  it was  for cancellation of the
bail.  Very   cogent  and   overwhelming  circumstances	 all
necessary for an order seeking cancellation of the bail. And
the trend  today is  towards granting bail because it is now
well-settled by a catena of decisions of this Court that the
power to  grant bail  is not  to  be  exercised	 as  if	 the
punishment before  trial is being imposed. The only material
considerations in  such a  situation are whether the accused
would be  readily available  for his trial and whether he is
likely to  abuse the  discretion granted  ill his  favour by
tampering with evidence. The order made by the High Court is
conspicuous  by	  its  silence	 on   these   two   relevant
considerations. It  is for these reasons that we consider in
the interest  of justice a compelling necessity to interfere
with the order made by the High Court.
     We accordingly  allow this	 appeal and  set  aside	 the
order made  by the  learned High Court Judge and restore the
one made  by  the  learned  Sessions  Judge  with  following
modifications:
     (i)   The appellant  shall be  released or	 if he is on
	  bail continue 'to be on bail on his furnishing two
	  fresh bail-bonds  each in  the amount	 of  Rs.5000
	  supported by a solvent security.
     (ii) The  'appellant shall report on first Monday every
	  month before the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Rajkot
	  at 11.00 A.M. till his trial commences. Thereafter
843
	  he would be subject to the further orders that may
	  be made-in  this behalf  by the  court which would
	  try him.
      (iii) Other conditions imposed by the learned Sessions
	  Judge remain unaltered.
     Order accordingly.
H.S.K.					     Appeal allowed.
844




