

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Azmat Khan vs Khillan Singh & Others on 8 November, 1983Equivalent citations: 1984 AIR  304, 1984 SCR  (1) 795
Author: S M Fazalali
Bench: Fazalali, Syed Murtaza
           PETITIONER:
AZMAT KHAN

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
KHILLAN SINGH & OTHERS

DATE OF JUDGMENT08/11/1983

BENCH:
FAZALALI, SYED MURTAZA
BENCH:
FAZALALI, SYED MURTAZA
VENKATARAMIAH, E.S. (J)

CITATION:
 1984 AIR  304		  1984 SCR  (1) 795
 1984 SCC  (1) 143	  1983 SCALE  (2)760


ACT:
     Representation  of	  the  People	Act,  1951-Sec.	 97-
Recrimination Petition-Necessity and effect of.



HEADNOTE:
     The appellant,  who was  a returned  candidate, filed a
recrimination petition in the election petition filed by the
first respondent  and another. As a result of the recount to
which all  the parties	had agreed,  the High Court declared
the first respondent as elected. Hence this appeal.
     Dismissing the appeal.
^
     HELD: The case of Jabar Singh v. Genda Lal on which the
appellant relies  is of	 no assistance	to him	because	 the
facts of  the present  case are clearly distinguishable from
that case.  In that  case the  returned	 candidate  did	 not
recriminate as	provided under sec. 97 of the Representation
of the	People Act, 1951. In the instant case, the appellant
had  admittedly	  recriminated	and   in  the  recrimination
petition one  of the  grounds taken  related to	 the  errors
committed at  the time	of the	counting of votes of the Ist
respondent by  the Returning Officer. The appellant had also
agreed to  the recounting  of the  votes secured  by all the
parties. [796 E-G]
     Jabar Singh  v. Genda Lal, [1964] 6 S.C.R. 54, referred
to and distinguished.



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Civil  Appeal No. 236 of
1983.
     From the  Judgment and  Order dated  the 11th  January,
1983 of	 the Punjab  and  Haryana  High	 Court	in  Election
Petition No.2 of 1982.
     M. C. Bhandare and Prem Malhotra for the Appellant.
     Hardev Singh and R. S. Sodhi for the Respondent.
     The Order of the Court was delivered by
     FAZAL ALI,	 J. This  election appeal  arises out of the
election held  in 1980	from the  constituency No. 56 called
Hathin to the
796
Legislative  Assembly  of  the	State  of  Haryana.  At	 the
counting  held	by  the	 Returning  Officer,  the  Appellant
secured 12,828	votes whereas respondent No. 1 Khillan Singh
got  12,655   votes  and  one  Ramjilal	 got  12,213  votes.
Accordingly the appellant was declared as elected. Aggrieved
by the	result of  the election,  Khillan Singh and Ramjilal
filed election petitions in the High Court. In the course of
the election  petition, the  appellant filed a recrimination
petition in  which one	of the grounds related to the errors
committed in  the counting of votes of respondent No. 1. All
the parties agreed that the court should order a recount and
that the  parties would	 be  bound  by	the  result  of	 the
recount. The  recount was  accordingly held  as a  result of
which Khillan  Singh respondent	 No. 1	got 12,751  i.e. the
highest number	of valid  votes and the appellant got 12,698
votes. In  view of the higher votes secured by Khillan Singh
respondent No.	1 at  the recount ordered by the High Court,
his petition  was allowed, the election of the appellant was
set aside  and Khillan	Singh was  declared as elected. This
appeal is filed against the decision of the High Court.
     In support	 of the	 appeal, Mr. Bhandare with the usual
ingenuity pressed  only one point before us. He submitted on
the basis  of the  Judgment of	this Court in Jabar Singh v.
Genda Lal  that even  if the  result had  gone in  favour of
respondent No. 1 he could not have been declared elected. We
have gone  through this authority and we find that the facts
of the	present case  are clearly  distinguishable.  In	 the
decision referred  to above  the returned  candidate did not
recriminate  as	  provided   under   section   97   of	 the
Representation of  the People  Act, 1951  and this  was	 the
important ground  on which  the Court said that it could not
make any  attack against  the alternative  claim made by the
petitioner.  In	  the  instant	 case,	the   appellant	 had
admittedly recriminated	 and in	 the recrimination  petition
one of	the grounds taken related to the errors committed at
the time  of the  counting of votes of the Ist respondent by
the Returning  Officer. The appellant had also agreed to the
recounting of the votes secured by all the parties. In these
circumstances, this  case does	not  appear  to	 be  of	 any
assistance to  the appellant. The decision of the High Court
is in  accordance with	the result of the recount ordered by
it.
     For the  foregoing reasons, the appeal is dismissed but
in the	circumstances of  the case there will be no order as
to costs.
H.S.K.					   Appeal dismissed.
797




