

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Jai Singh vs Sarwan Singh & Others on 14 November, 1983Equivalent citations: 1983 AIR 1326, 1984 SCR  (1) 811
Author: Y Chandrachud
Bench: Chandrachud, Y.V. ((Cj)
           PETITIONER:
JAI SINGH

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
SARWAN SINGH & OTHERS

DATE OF JUDGMENT14/11/1983

BENCH:
CHANDRACHUD, Y.V. ((CJ)
BENCH:
CHANDRACHUD, Y.V. ((CJ)
VENKATARAMIAH, E.S. (J)

CITATION:
 1983 AIR 1326		  1984 SCR  (1) 811
 1984 SCC  (1) 165	  1983 SCALE  (2)677


ACT:
     Criminal Proceedings-Appeal  against conviction-Accused
cannot be acquitted without considering evidence on record.



HEADNOTE:
     The  respondents	were  convicted	 and  sentenced	 for
committing murder  and other  offences. The deceased and the
respondents, who respectively belonged to the Rajput and the
Harijan factions  of the village, had a dispute over a piece
of land which had been decided in favour of the Rajputs by a
final order  of the  High Court	 in second  appeal. When the
respondents' appeal  against conviction in the criminal case
came up	 for hearing, the High Court took the view that 'the
matter could  be settled  by a	compromise' and	 invited the
Harijans and  Rajput panchayats	 of the	 village  to  appear
before it  and, ultimately,  called for	 the papers  of	 the
second appeal  decided earlier	and passed  an order  to the
effect that, as agreed between the parties, the claim of the
Harijans for  four kanals  of land was allowed. Finding that
some of the affected parties were not served, the High Court
directed that  if any  unserved party  had a  grievance,  it
could apply  for review	 of the judgment. After re-disposing
of the	second appeal  relating to  the dispute over land in
the manner stated above, the High Court took up the criminal
appeal for  hearing and,  without considering  the  evidence
before	it,   delivered	 a  short  judgment  acquitting	 the
respondents.
     Remanding the appeal,
^
     HELD: It is impossible to appreciate how the High Court
could dispose  of the  criminal appeal in this extraordinary
fashion. It  is obvious	 that the High Court had made up its
mind to	 acquit the accused without considering the evidence
before it.  Finding that  the offence  of murder  cannot  be
compounded,  the  High	Court  took  the  facile  course  of
acquitting the	accused who,  by a considered judgment, were
convicted by the trial Court. [814 C-D]
     The judgment  of the  High Court shows how important it
is for	the judges to observe the norms laid down by law for
dispensing justice.  'Justice under  the tree' or 'panchayat
justice' have  advantages of  their own,  but they cannot be
confused with  justice according  to the  Chancellor's foot.
[812 F]



JUDGMENT:
     CRIMINAL APPELLATE	 JURISDICTION: Criminal	 Appeal	 No.
562 of 1983.
812
     From the  Judgment and  Order dated the 29th July, 1982
of the	Punjab and  Haryana  High  Court  at  Chandigarh  in
Criminal Appeal No. 78-DB/80.
     Prem Malhotra for the Appellant.
     R.K. Garg and D.K.Garg for the respondents.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     CHANDRACHUD, C.  J. Thirteen  persons were sentenced to
life imprisonment  by the learned Additional Sessions Judge,
Ambala, under section 302 read with section 149 of the Penal
Code. For  other offences connected with the main offence of
murder, they  were sentenced  to lesser	 concurrent terms of
imprisonment. The  charge against  the accused	is that they
committed the  murder of one Dhian Singh and caused injuries
to six others on June 6, 1980.
     The accused are Harijans while the deceased Dhian Singh
belonged to  the Rajput faction of the village of Sultanpur.
There were  disputes between  the two groups over a piece of
land. The  Harijans filed a suit to establish their title to
that land  but they lost that suit, having taken it upto the
High Court in Second Appeal Proceedings under section 145 of
the Code  of Criminal  Procedure were instituted against the
two factions, which also the Rajputs won.
     The judgment which the High Court of Punjab and Haryana
declared in  this case	shows how important it is for Judges
to observe  the	 norms	laid  down  by	law  for  dispensing
justice. 'Justice under the tree' or the 'Panchayat justice'
have advantages	 of their  own, but  they cannot be confused
with  justice	according  to	the  Chancellor's  foot.  If
anything, the strange procedure adopted by the High Court in
this case  has only  succeeded in  giving a  bad name  to  a
useful	innovation  which,  if	tried  cautiously  and	with
circumspection, will take away at least a frivolous chunk of
litigation which  clogs the  wheels of	justice in Courts of
law.
     When the  appeal filed  by	 the  accused  came  up	 for
hearing before	the High  Court, it  took the view that "the
matter could  be settled  by a	compromise". It	 invited the
Harijan Panchayat and the Rajput Panchayat of the village of
Sultanpur to  appear before  it. On  May 28,  1982  the	 two
Panchayats
813
agreed that  the Harijans should be allotted four kanals out
of the	disputed land.	The High  Court accordingly directed
that  the   Revenue  authorities  should  go  to  the  spot,
demarcate that	land and  report back  to it  along with the
plans. The  report  submitted  by  the	Revenue	 authorities
showed, according  to the High Court, that its order was not
understood correctly.  The High	 Court then  entered into  a
dialogue with  Shri Bhasin,  District Attorney, Haryana, who
informed it that he had discussed the matter with the S.D.O.
(Civil), Kalka,	 and that  the said  Officer was of the view
that the  land could be demarcated so that four kanals could
be allotted therefrom to the Harijans.
     While hearing  the criminal appeal against the order of
conviction for murder and the other offences, the High Court
called for  the papers	of Second  Appeal No.  742 of  1978,
which was  disposed of in 1980 by a final order in favour of
the Rajputs.  All the  effected parties	 were not before the
High Court  as they  possibly could  not be,  since what was
before the  High Court	was the	 criminal appeal and not the
Second Appeal.	The High  Court, finding  that some  of	 the
affected parties  were not  served,  directed  that  if	 any
unserved party	had a  grievance, it  could approach  it for
review of its judgment.
     The High  Court thereafter	 recorded the  statements of
the two	 learned counsel,  Shri F.C.  Aggarwal and Shri C.D.
Dewan who  appeared for	 the parties.  Shri Aggarwal  stated
that he	 agreed that  four kanals  from the  land should  be
allotted to  the Harijans.  Shri Dewan made a statement that
he agreed with what Shri Aggarwal had stated. The High Court
then had Second Appeal No. 742 of 1978 called out and passed
an order  to the  effect that as agreed between the parties,
the claim  of the  Harijans for	 four kanals of the land was
allowed.
     Having thus  re-disposed of the Second Appeal, the High
Court took  up the  criminal appeal  for hearing. The entire
judgment of the High Court runs thus:
	  "We do  not wish  to give  a detailed	 judgment in
     this  case.  It  suffices	to  mention  that  there  is
     abundant evidence	on record  to indicate	that  actual
     possession of the land falling under the Asthan of Sidh
     Baba, the	well and  the adjoining	 houses was  of	 the
     accused. It looks
814
     more probable  that  when	some  force  being  used  to
     dispossess them, they protested and when their protests
     were unavailing  violence was  used  resulting  in	 the
     death of Dhian Singh, deceased.
	  In the circumstances, we give the benefit of doubt
     to the  accused persons,  and acquit  them of  all	 the
     charges. We  do hope  that in  future the	parties will
     live together  amicably. With  these observations,	 the
     appeal is allowed."
     With respect,  it is  impossible to  appreciate how the
High Court  could dispose  of the  criminal appeal  in	this
extraordinary fashion. It is obvious that the High Court had
made up	 its mind  to acquit the accused without considering
the evidence  before it.  Finding that the offence of murder
cannot be  compounded, the High Court took the facile course
of acquitting  the accused  who, by  a considered  judgment,
were convicted	by the learned Additional Sessions Judge. It
is less than just to allow the judgment of the High Court to
stand. Shri  R.K.  Garg,  who  appeared	 on  behalf  of	 the
accused, found	it impossible to support the judgment of the
High Court.
     Accordingly, we  set aside	 the judgment  of  the	High
Court dated  July 29,  1982 and	 remand the appeal to it for
disposal in accordance with law. We also set aside the order
passed on  that date  by the High Court in Second Appeal No.
742 of	1978. The earlier judgment of the High Court in that
appeal will be restored. We hope that the High Court will be
able to	 take up the criminal appeal for hearing at an early
date. If the evidence warrants the acquittal of the accused,
they will be entitled to be acquitted. We express no opinion
on the merits of that matter.
H.L.C.					    Appeal Remanded.
815




