

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Commissioner Of Wealth Tax, ... vs Vadilal Lallubhai Etc on 21 October, 1983Equivalent citations: 1984 AIR  157, 1984 SCR  (1) 485
Author: R Pathak
Bench: Pathak, R.S.
           PETITIONER:
COMMISSIONER OF WEALTH TAX, GUJARAT, AHMEDABAD

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
VADILAL LALLUBHAI ETC.

DATE OF JUDGMENT21/10/1983

BENCH:
PATHAK, R.S.
BENCH:
PATHAK, R.S.
VENKATARAMIAH, E.S. (J)

CITATION:
 1984 AIR  157		  1984 SCR  (1) 485
 1983 SCC  (4) 697	  1983 SCALE  (2)821


ACT:
     Wealth  Tax  Act,	1957-sec.  2(m)-Definition  of	'net
wealth'-Interpretation of.  Income tax,	 wealth tax and gift
tax  liabilities   are	debts  on  the	valuation  date	 and
deductions in respect of those liabilities are to be allowed
on the basis of their final quantification on assessment.



HEADNOTE:
     The assessee  while computing  his net wealth claimed a
deduction  in	respect	 of  debts  which  included  amounts
representing estimated liabilities on account of income tax,
wealth tax and gift tax. The Wealth Tax Officer rejected the
claim on  the ground  that as those liabilities were claimed
on the	basis of  an estimate  they could not be regarded as
debts owed  on the  valuation date.  In appeal the Appellate
Assistant  Commissioner	  allowed  part	 of  the  deductions
claimed. The  Revenue's appeal to the Appellate Tribunal was
dismissed. On  a reference  being made	the High  Court held
against the  Revenue. In  this Court  the Revenue  contended
that on	 a true construction of sec. 2 (m) of the Wealth Tax
Act defining  the expression  "net wealth" the tax liability
disclosed by the assessee in his returns should. be taken as
representing the debts owed by the assessee on the valuation
date.
     Dismissing the appeals,
^
     HELD: It  is settled  law that  an income tax liability
becomes crystallized  on the  last day	of the previous year
corresponding to  the  particular  assessment  year,  and  a
wealth tax  liability becomes  crystallized on the valuation
date corresponding  to the  particular assessment  year.  In
each case  the liabilities  are perfected  debts on the last
day of	the previous year or the valuation date, as the case
may be. Likewise, a gift tax liability becomes crystallized,
and therefore  a perfected  debt, on  the last	day  of	 the
previous year  relevant to  the particular  assessment year.
[487 F-G; 488 A]
     Kesoram   Industries   and	  Cotton   Mills   Ltd.	  v.
Commissioner of	 Wealth Tax  (Central), Calcutta,  (1966) 59
I.T.R. 767; H.H. Setu Parvati Bayi v. Commissioner of Wealth
Tax, Kerala,  (1968) 69	 I.T.R.	 864;  and  Commissioner  of
Wealth Tax,  Madras v.	K.S.N. Bhatt, Civil Appeals Nos. 384
to 387	of 1978,  Judgment delivered  on  October  21,	1983
referred to.
     When, in  the course  of a	 wealth tax  assessment, the
assessee makes	a claim	 to deduction  on account  of income
tax, wealth tax and gift tax liabilities
486
subsisting as debts owed by him on the valuation date, it is
the final  quantification of  the particular  tax  liability
which must  be taken  into account.  Where  the	 wealth	 tax
assessment so  made is	carried in appeal, there is no doubt
that the  appellate authority  will take  into	account	 the
ultimate quantification	 of the	 tax liability	even  though
such ultimate  quantification has  been	 reached  after	 the
relevant valuation  date and  during  the  pendency  of	 the
wealth tax appeal. [488 F-G]



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal Nos. 1524-47
of 1973.
     From the  Judgment and  Order dated  13.12.1972 of	 the
Gujarat High  Court in	Wealth Tax  References Nos. 6 to 11,
13, 15,	 17, 18,  22,24 and  25 of  1971, 34,  39, and 40 of
1970, 20 and 42 of 1971, 22, 35, 41,42,43 & 38 of 1970.
     S.C. Manchanda,  B.B. Ahuja  and Miss A. Subhashini for
the Appellant.
     F.S. Nariman,  Mrs. A.K.  Verma and  K.J. John  for the
Respondents.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     PATHAK, J:	 These	appeals	 are  directed	against	 the
judgment of  the Gujarat High Court disposing of a number of
wealth tax  references and  answering the following question
against the Revenue in each reference:-
	  "Whether  in	computing  the	net  wealth  of	 the
     assessee, the amount deductible in respect of liability
     of tax  for any  year for	which the  assessment is the
     completed after  the valuation date is the liability as
     ascertainable on  the  valuation  date  or	 the  actual
     amount of tax subsequently assessed ?"
The facts  are substantially  similar for  different appeals
and therefore  it will	be sufficient to set forth the facts
in one	of them	 alone. In Civil Appeal No. 1524 of 1973 the
facts are these.
     In the computation of his net wealth for the assessment
year 1962-63,  the corresponding  valuation date being March
31, 1962,  the assessee	 claimed a  deduction in  respect of
debts  which   included	  amounts   representing   estimated
liabilities on	account of income tax and wealth tax for the
assessment year 1962-63. The Wealth Tax Officer rejected the
claim on  the ground  that as those liabilities were claimed
on the basis of an estimate they could not be regarded as
487
debts owed  on the  valuation dates.  In appeal	 before	 the
Appellate Assistant  Commissioner of Wealth Tax the assessee
claimed the  deduction of  a larger sum on account of income
tax, wealth  tax and  gift tax	liabilities.  The  Appellate
Assistant Commissioner	scrutinised the	 data placed  before
him and	 allowed part of the deductions claimed. The Revenue
now appealed  to the  Appellate Tribunal, and contended that
the deductions on account of income tax, wealth tax and gift
tax liabilities	 for the assessment year 1962-63 should have
been allowed on the basis of the respective returns filed by
the assessee and not on the basis of the final assessment as
the assessment	orders were  made after	 the valuation date.
The Appellate Tribunal rejected the contention and dismissed
the appeal.  At the  instance of  the Revenue, the Appellate
Tribunal referred the case to the Gujarat High Court for its
opinion on  the question  of law  set forth earlier. Similar
references were	 made in  other cases,	and all of them were
disposed of  by a  common judgment  of the  High Court dated
December 13,  1972. The	 High Court,  relying on its earlier
judgment  in   Commissioner  of	  Wealth  Tax	v.  Kantilal
Manilal(1) held	 that the  deduction admissible in computing
the net	 wealth of  the assessee  must be  calculated on the
basis of  the tax as finally determined on assessment though
the  assessment	  may  have  been  made	 subsequent  to	 the
valuation date,	 and not  on the  basis of  tax computed  in
accordance with the returns filed by the assessee.
     In these  appeals, it  is contended  on behalf  of	 the
Revenue that  the High	Court has  erred, and that on a true
construction of	 s. 2 (m) of the Wealth Tax Act defining the
expression "net	 wealth" the  tax liability disclosed by the
assessee in  his returns should be taken as representing the
debt owed  by the assessee on the valuation date. Now, it is
settled	 law   that  an	  income   tax	 liability   becomes
crystallized  on   the	last   day  of	 the  previous	year
corresponding to  the  particular  assessment  year,  and  a
wealth tax  liability becomes  crystallized on the valuation
date corresponding  to the  particular assessment  year.  In
each case  the liabilities  are perfected  debts on the last
day of	previous year or the valuation date, as the case may
be.  See   Kesoram  Industries	and  Cotton  Mills  Ltd.  v.
Commissioner of	 Wealth Tax  (Central), Calcutta(2) and H.H.
Setu Parvati  Bayi v. Commissioner of Wealth Tax, Kerala.(3)
Likewise, we think a gift
488
tax  liability	 becomes  crystallized,	  and  therefore   a
perfected debt,	 on  the  last	day  of	 the  previous	year
relevant   to	the   particular   assessement	 year.	 See
Commissioner of	 Wealth Tax,  Madras v. K.S.N. Bhatt (1) The
object and purpose of the assessment procedure prescribed by
the relevant  tax statute,  be it  the Income  Tax Act,	 the
Wealth Tax  Act or  the Gift  Tax Act,	is to  quantify	 the
precise	 amount	  of  the  tax	liability.  The	 process  is
initiated ordinarily  by the  assessee filing  a tax return,
and thereupon  the asssessment machinery swings into motion.
The tax return is scrutinised by the assessing authority and
in accordance  with the	 procedure detailed  in the relevant
statute the  assessing authority  proceeds to  determine the
true figure,  in its  opinion, of  the	asseessee's  taxable
income or  taxable wealth  or total  value  of	the  taxable
gifts, depending  on whether  it is  a case  of income	tax,
wealth tax  or gift  tax. The  assessment order	 made by the
assessing authority specifies the assessed income, wealth or
value of  the gifts,  and  on  that  the  corresponding	 tax
liability is  computed followed	 by a  notice of demand. The
assessment order may be subjected to consideration in appeal
before the  Appellate Assistant	 Commissioner and thereafter
the case  may be  carried in  second appeal to the Appellate
Tribunal, in  reference to  the High Court and ultimately in
appeal before  this Court.  At every stage, the endeavour of
the  authority,	 tribunal  or  court  is  to  adjudicate  on
questions which	 will lead  in the  final result  to a	true
determination of the tax liability. There may be cases where
the assessment	finally made  may be  reopened in accordance
with the  procedure and	 subject to the conditions stated in
the relevant  statute. There  may  also	 be  cases  where  a
rectification of  apparent errors  is effected	pursuant  to
jurisdiction granted  by the  relevant statute.	 Both  these
proceedings   are    similarly	 intended   for	  the	true
quantification of  the tax liability. When, in the course of
a wealth  tax assessment,  the assessee	 makes	a  claim  to
deduction on  account of income tax, wealth tax and gift tax
liabilities subsisting as debts owed by him on the valuation
date, it  is the  final quantification of the particular tax
liability which must be taken into account. Where the wealth
tax assessment	so made	 is carried  in appeal,	 we have  no
doubt that  the appellate  authority will  take into account
the ultimate  quantification  of  the  tax  liability,	even
though such  ultimate quantification  has been reached after
the relevant  valuation date  and during the pendency of the
wealth tax appeal.
489
     Upon the  aforesaid considerations,  we are  of opinion
that the  High Court  has acted	 rightly in  holding that in
computing the  net wealth  of  the  assessee  the  deduction
admissible must	 be calculated	on the	basis of  the tax as
finally quantified  on assessment even though the assessment
may have been made subsequent to the valuation date. Once an
assessement order  is passed,  the  data  disclosed  by	 the
assessee in  his return	 is no	longer determinative  of the
assessee's tax liability becomes in law it stands superseded
by the assessment order.
     The appeals are dimissed with costs.
H.S.K.					  Appeals dismissed.
490




