

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Gamon India Limited vs Niranjan Dass on 5 December, 1983Equivalent citations: 1984 AIR  500, 1984 SCR  (1) 959
Author: D Desai
Bench: Desai, D.A.
           PETITIONER:
GAMON INDIA LIMITED

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
NIRANJAN DASS

DATE OF JUDGMENT05/12/1983

BENCH:
DESAI, D.A.
BENCH:
DESAI, D.A.
MISRA, R.B. (J)
MISRA RANGNATH

CITATION:
 1984 AIR  500		  1984 SCR  (1) 959
 1984 SCC  (1) 509	  1983 SCALE  (2)863


ACT:
     Industrial	 Disputes   Act	  1947,	  Section   2	(oo)
retrenchment-What  is-Services	 terminated  on	 account  of
recession   in	  work-Termination   whether	amounts	  to
retrenchment.



HEADNOTE:
     The respondent was employed by the appellant-Company as
a Senior  Clerk till  he received  a notice  terminating his
services. The  notice stated that on account of reduction in
volume of  the business	 of  the  Company  as  a  result  of
recession, his services were being terminated.
     On	 a   reference	by   the  Government,	whether	 the
retrenchment of	 the respondent	 was unjustified  or illegal
the Industrial Tribunal held that since the conditions for a
valid  retrenchment   have  not	  been	complied  with,	 the
respondent continued to be in service.
     In a  petition under  Article 226,	 a Single Judge held
that since  the termination  of the  services was consequent
upon the  closure of  the Delhi	 office, the  case would  be
governed by  Section 25	 FFF of	 the Industrial Disputes Act
1947 which  does not  prescribe payment of compensation as a
condition precedent to a valid termination of service by way
of retrenchment.
     In the  Letters Patent  Appeal, the  Division Bench set
aside the  judgment of	the Single  Judge on the ground that
the reference  to the  Industrial Tribunal  was to  consider
whether the  retrenchment was  illegal	or  unjustified	 and
therefore it was not open to the Single Judge to come to the
conclusion that	 the case  was one  of closure	governed  by
Section 25  FFF. The  Division Bench  therefore restored the
Tribunal's award.
     Dismissing the Appeal of the Company,
^
     HELD: 1.  The award  of the  Tribunal was	correct	 and
unassailable. The  respondent had  become surplus on account
of  reduction	in  volume  of	work  and  that	 constitutes
retrenchment even in the traditional sense of the term
						     [963 H]
     Pipraich Sugar  Mills  Ltd.  v.  Pipraich	Sugar  Mills
Mazdoor Union,	[1956] SCR  172; State	Bank of	 India v. N.
Sundara Money, [1976] 3 SCR 160; Hindustan Steel Ltd. v. The
Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Orissa and others, [1977] 1
SCR 586;  Santosh Gupta	 v. State  Bank of Patiala, [1980] 3
SCR 340; Delhi Cloth and
960
Genral Mills Ltd. v. Shambu Nath Mukerjee, [1978] 1 SCR 591;
Mohan Lal  v. Management  of  M/s  Bharat  Electronics	Ltd.
[1981] 3  SCR  518;  L.	 Robert	 D'suoza  v.  The  Executive
Engineer, Southern Railway & Anr. [1982] 3 SCR 251, referred
to.
     2. The  pre-requisite for	a valid retrenchment as laid
down in	 Section 25  F	has  not  been	complied  with,	 and
therefor the  retrenchment  bringing  about  termination  of
service is ab initio void. [964 E]
     In the  instant case,  the notice	recites	 that  as  a
result of  the recession  in the  volume of  the work of the
company,  the  services	 of  the  respondent  would  not  be
required by the company after October 14, 1967 and that this
notice contemplated by section 25F (a). Not even one word is
stated in the notice that the office to which the respondent
was attached was in the process of being closed down, so his
services would no more be required. [963 D-E]
     3. The termination of service for the reasons mentioned
in the	notice is not covered by any of the Clauses (a), (b)
and (c)	 of Section 2 (oo) which defines retrenchment and it
is now	well-settled that  where the  termination of service
does not  fall within  any of  the excluded  categories, the
termination would  be ipso  facto retrenchment.	 It was	 not
even attempted	to be  urged that the case of the respondent
would  fall  in	 any  of  the  excluded	 categories.  It  is
therefore, indisputably a case of retrenchment. [964 C-D]
     4 (i).  The appellant  will have  to establish the fact
that the  respondent has  reached the  age of superannuation
and that physical reinstatement is not possible. [965 A]
     (ii). The	respondent will be entitled to all backwages
including benefit  of revised  wages or	 salary if  there is
revision  of   pay-scales  with	 yearly	 increment,  revised
dearness allowance  or variable	 dearness allowance  and all
terminal  benefits   if	 he   was   reached   the   age	  of
superannuation such  as Provident  Fund, Gratuity  etc. Back
wages should be calculated as if the respondent continued in
service uninterrupted. [965 B-C]
     (iii). The	 respondent has	 been unlawfully kept out of
service. The  appellant-company shall  therefore pay all the
arrears with  12 per  cent interest from the date the amount
became due and payable till realisation. [965 D]



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION : Civil Appeal No. 1741 of
1980.
     From the Judgment and Order dated 16th January, 1980 of
the High  Court of  Delhi at  New Delhi,  in Letters  Patent
Appeal No. 25 of 1970.
     U.R. Lalit,  V.N. Ganpule	and Mrs. V.D. Khanna for the
Appellant.
961
     Jitendra Sharma for the Respondent.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     DESAI, J. Respondent Shri Niranjan Dass was employed as
a  Senior   Clerk  by	the  appellant-company	as  per	 the
appointment order  contained in	 the letter  dated April 10,
1962. The letter of appointment inter alia provided that the
respondent may be posted any where in India or abroad as per
the requirements  of the  company and  it was  signed by its
Zonal Manager,	Central Zone, Delhi. Respondent continued to
serve in  that capacity	 when on  September 14, 1967, he was
served with  a notice  terminating his	services. The notice
reads as under:
	  "Due to the reduction in the volume of business of
     the Company  as a	result of  the	recession  in  (sic)
     services will  not be required by the company after the
     14th  October,   1967,  and  this	may  be	 treated  as
     statutory notice  of one  month of	 termination of your
     service.
	  Your leave  shall run concurrently with the notice
     period, and  you may avail of leave due to you, if any,
     during the notice period.
	  Personnel Section at Head Office have been advised
     to settle	your dues,  and you may write to them in the
     matter.
	  We take  this opportunity  to thank  you for	your
     past services,  and it  is very  unfortunate  that	 the
     present circumstances  have compelled  us to issue this
     notice.
	  Should it be possible for us to offer you a job at
     any of  our works	sites at a later date, we shall make
     you a fresh offer at that time."
Respondent raised  an industrial dispute and the appropriate
Government by  the order  dated May  30, 1968  referred	 the
industrial  dispute   for  adjudication	 to  the  Industrial
Tribunal.  The	 reference  was	 couched  in  the  following
language.
962
	  "Whether the retrenchment of Shri Niranjan Dass is
     unjustified or  illegal and  if so, what directions are
     necessary in this respect."
     By the  award dated  February 25,	1969. the Industrial
Tribunal held  that the	 retrenchment of  the respondent was
illegal and  unjustified and  gave  a  declaration  that  he
continues to  be in  service of the appellant-company and is
entitled to  his  wages	 till  he  is  lawfully	 retrenched.
Appellant-company challenged the award in Civil Writ No. 462
of 1969	 filed by  it in  the High Court of Delhi. A learned
Single Judge held that as the Delhi office of the appellant-
company was  closed, the  case of  the respondent  would  be
governed by  Sec. 25FFF	 being termination  consequent	upon
closure, and  therefore payment	 of compensation  was not  a
condition precedent  and  the  termination  of	service	 was
valid, The learned Judge accordingly set aside the award and
remitted  the	matter	to   the  Tribunal  to	decide	what
directions, if any, are necessary in respect of retrenchment
of the	respondent in  the light  of the  discussion in	 the
judgment Respondent  preferred Letters	Patent Appeal No. 25
of 1970	 against the decision of the learned Single Judge. A
Division Bench	of Delhi  High Court held that the reference
made by	 the appropriate  Government required the Industrial
Tribunal to consider whether the retrenchment was illegal or
unjustified and	 therefore it  was implicit in the reference
itself that it was a case of retrenchment, validity of which
to be  examined in  the reference  and therefore  it was not
open to the learned Single Judge to change the 'base' of the
reference and  to come	to the	conclusion that the case was
one of	closure of  the	  industrial undertaking governed by
Sec. 25FFF  of the  Industrial Disputes Act. Approaching the
matter from  this angle,  the Division	Bench set  aside the
decision of  the learned Single Judge and restored the award
made by	 the Industrial	 Tribunal. Hence  this appeal by the
company by special leave.
     The  Industrial   Tribunal	 held  that  respondent	 was
retrenched from	 service  by  the  appellant  and  the	pre-
conditions for	a valid	 retrenchment were not complied with
and therefore  the respondent  was entitled to a declaration
that he	 continues to  be in  service with  all the benefits
flowing from the said declaration. A learned Single Judge of
the High  Court interfered  with this award holding that the
appellant-company had  closed its Delhi office and therefore
the termination	 of service  was consequent upon the closure
and even  if it	 constitutes retrenchment, the case would be
governed by  Sec. 25FFF	 which does not prescribe payment of
compensation as a
963
condition-precedent to a valid termination of service by way
of  retrenchment.  In  the  Letters  Patent  Appeal  at	 the
instance of the respondent, the Division Bench set aside the
judgment of the learned Single Judge holding that it was not
open to	 the learned Single Judge to hold that it was a case
of closure  covered by Sec. 25FFF because it was implicit in
the reference  that the case was one of retrenchment and the
only question  with the	 Industrial Tribunal was called upon
to decide  was whether	the retrenchment  was unjustified or
illegal. It  is not  necessary to examine the view expressed
by  the	 Division  Bench  of  the  High	 Court	whether	 the
assumption   underlying	   an	order	 of   reference	  is
unquestionable	at   the  hearing   of	the  reference.	 The
question, however,  is whether the learned Single Judge, who
interfered with	 the award  of the Tribunal was justified in
coming to  the conclusion  that the  case was one of closure
covered by  Sec. 25FFF	or the Industrial Tribunal was right
in holding that it is a case of retrenchment covered by Sec.
25F of	Industrial Disputes  Act. This point can be answered
by mere	 reference to  the notice  served by  the appellant-
company	 on  the  respondent  intimating  to  him  that	 his
services will no more be required effective from October 14,
1967. The notice as a whole has been extracted hereinbefore.
The notice  recites that  as a	result of  recession in	 the
volume of  work of  the company,  services of the respondent
would no  more be  required by the company after October 14,
1967 and this notice may be treated as a statutory notice as
contemplated by	 Sec. 25F(a). There is not even a whisper in
the notice  that as  the Delhi	office is being closed down,
the services  of the  respondent would	not be	required. An
attempt	 was   made  while   leading  evidence	 before	 the
Industrial Tribunal  to show  that the Zonal office at Delhi
was closed on January 31, 1968 while the Central Zone office
was closed  somewhere in  October, 1967.  If  by  September,
1967, the appellant company had resolved to close the office
at Delhi  to  which  the  respondent  was  attached,  it  is
unthinkable that  aspect would not be recited in the notice.
The necessity  for termination	of service of the respondent
recited in  the notice	was recession in the work handled by
the company.  Not even one word is stated in the notice that
the office  to which  the respondent was attached was in the
process of  being closed down, so his services would no more
be required.  On a true construction of the notice, it would
appear that  the respondent had become surplus on account of
reduction  in	volume	of   work   and	  that	 constitutes
retrenchment even  in the  traditional sense  of the term as
interpreted in	Pipraich Sugar	Mills Ltd. v. Pipraich Sugar
Mills
964
Mazdoor Union(1) though that view does not hold the field in
view of	 the recent decisions of this Court in State Bank of
India v.  N. Sundara  Money(2)	 Hindustan Steel Ltd. v. The
Presiding  Officer,  Labour  Court,  Orissa  and  Others;(3)
Santosh Gupta  v. State	 Bank of Patiala;(4) Delhi Cloth and
General Mills  Ltd. v. Shambu Nath Mukerjee;(5) Mohan Lal v.
Management of  M/s Bharat  Electronics Ltd(6)  and L. Robert
D'souza	 v.  The  Executive  Engineer,	Southern  Railway  &
Anr.(7) The  recitals and  averments in	 the notice leave no
room for  doubt that  the  service  of	the  respondent	 was
terminated for	the reason  that on account of recession and
reduction in  the volume  of work of the company, respondent
has become surplus. Even apart from this, the termination of
service for  the reasons  mentioned in	the  notice  is	 not
covered by any of the clauses (a), (b) and (c) of Sec. 2(oo)
which defines  retrenchment and	 it is	by now	well-settled
that where  the termination  of service does not fall within
any of	the excluded  categories, the  termination would  be
ipso facto  retrenchment. It  was not  even attempted  to be
urged that  the case  of the respondent would fall in any of
the excluded  categories. It is there indisputably a case of
retrenchment.
It is  not disputed  that  the	pre-requisite  for  a  valid
retrenchment as	 laid down in Sec. 25f has not been complied
with  and   therefore  the   retrenchment   bringing   about
termination of	service is  ab initio void. Viewed from this
angle, the  award of the Industrial Tribunal was correct and
unassailable and  the learned  Single Judge  was in error in
interfering with  the same.  Undoubtedly, the Division Bench
of the	High Court  has set  aside the	order of the learned
Single Judge  and restored the award for reasons of its own.
However, for  the reasons  herein indicated, the decision of
the Division  Bench in	Letters Patent Appeal No. 25 of 1970
is upheld  and confirmed and this appeal must therefore fail
and accordingly it is dismissed.
     In the  course of hearing of this appeal, it was stated
that the  respondent has  reached the  age of superannuation
therefore physical reinstatement in service is not possible.
Appellant will have to
965
establish that	fact but  in the  event, the appellant shows
that under a valid rule, respondent has reached the stage of
superannuation and  therefore physical	reinstatement is not
possible, it  is hereby	 declared that	the respondent shall
continue to  be in  service uninterruptedly from the date of
the attempted  termination  of	service	 till  the  date  of
superannuation. Respondent  would be  entitled to  all	back
wages including	 the benefit  of revised  wages or salary if
during the  period there  is  revision	of  pay-scales	with
yearly increment,  revised dearness  allowance	or  variable
dearness allowance  and all  terminal  benefits	 if  he	 has
reached the  age of  superannuation such  as Provident Fund,
Gratuity etc.  Back wages  should be  calculated as  if	 the
respondent continued  in service  uninterrupted. He  is also
entitled to  leave encashment  and bonus if other workmen in
the same  category were	 paid the  same. It appears that the
respondent  has	  been	unlawfully   kept  out	of  service,
therefore it  is but  just that	 the appellant-company shall
pay  all   the	arrears	  as  calculated  according  to	 the
directions herein  given with 12% interest from the date the
amount became  due and	payable till  realisation. Appellant
shall also  pay costs  to the  respondent quantified  at Rs.
5,000. The appellant is directed to pay the amount as herein
directed to be paid within 3 months from today.
     Mr. Jitendra Sharma, learned counsel for the respondent
stated that  the costs	awarded to the respondent be paid to
the Legal  Aid Cell  set up by Indian Association of Lawyers
in collaboration with Womens' Council.
     Order accordingly.
N.V.K.					   Appeal dismissed.
966




