

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Hira Lal vs District Judge, Ghaziabad & ... on 13 April, 1983Equivalent citations: 1984 AIR 1212, 1984 SCR  (2) 739
Author: M Rangnath
Bench: Misra Rangnath
           PETITIONER:
HIRA LAL

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
DISTRICT JUDGE, GHAZIABAD & OTHERS

DATE OF JUDGMENT13/04/1983

BENCH:
MISRA RANGNATH
BENCH:
MISRA RANGNATH
PATHAK, R.S.

CITATION:
 1984 AIR 1212		  1984 SCR  (2) 739
 1983 SCC  (3) 371	  1983 SCALE  (1)388


ACT:
     U.P.   State    Subordinate   Service-Reservation	 for
Scheduled Castes-Appointments  should be  made in accordance
with roster prescribed.



HEADNOTE:
     The petitioner,  a	 member	 of  the  Scheduled  Castes,
secured the  7th position in the test and interview held for
filling up six vacancies in the post of stenographer and was
not selected  for appointment.	The State Government had, by
an order,  directed that  18 per  cent of  the posts  in the
subordinate   services	should	be  reserved  for  Scheduled
Castes	whenever   recruitment	was   to  be   made  through
competition and also provided that in the roster register of
every 25  vacancies,  the  1st	7th,  13th,  19th  and	25th
vacancies should be reserved for Scheduled Castes. The stand
taken by  the respondents was that while making selection to
the six	 vacancies in  question,  no  reservation  had	been
intended to be made in view of the position that the post of
stenographer was  covered under	 Class III  service and	 the
total strength	of Class  III employees	 as on	the relevant
date was  132 and  there were  as  many	 as  28	 among	them
belonging to the Scheduled Castes which was more than 21 per
cent. The  petitioner contended that the direction regarding
reservation should have been applied and he should have been
selected for appointment.
     Allowing the petition,
^
     HELD: That	 more than 21 per cent of the posts in Grade
III  service  were  being  manned  by  people  belonging  to
Scheduled Castes  at the  relevant time	 is no answer to the
prescription of	 the roster. It is not known whether some of
the recruits  of earlier  years already in service belonging
to the	Scheduled Castes  had come  on the  basis of overall
merit without  reference to  reservation. When six vacancies
were being filled up at a time in one year if the roster was
to be  followed, one  of the  posts would  indisputably have
gone to	 the candidate	of the	Scheduled Castes. As per the
roster, the  petitioner was entitled to be appointed against
the first vacancy. [731 E-H; 742-A]



JUDGMENT:
     ORIGINAL JURISDICTION: Writ Petition No. 4007 of 1982
     (Under Article 32 of the Constitution of India)
     R.K. Jain for the Petitioner.
     Prithvi Raj and Mrs. S. Dikshit for the Respondent.
740
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     RANGANATH MISRA,  J. Petitioner, who offered himself as
a candidate  for one  of the posts of Stenographer in Hindi,
in the	establishment of  District Judge of Ghaziabad in the
State of  Uttar Pradesh,  has come  with this petition under
Article 32  alleging the violation of his fundamental rights
enshrined in  Arts. 14	and 16	of the	Constitution. He has
pleaded that  he is a member of the scheduled castes and the
State Government  by a	general order  in  March,  1965	 had
directed that  "in services  subordinate to  U.P. Government
for recruitment through competition" 18% of the posts should
be reserved  for members of the scheduled castes. He further
alleged that  when six vacancies in the post of Stenographer
in Hindi  were advertised  to be  filled up  and he  offered
himself as a candidate, he was examined in shorthand test on
April 17, 1982, and was shown in the third place in the list
of successful candidates published on April 24, 1982 and was
called to  an interview on May 1, 1982. According to him, in
the final  list of  successful candidates  his position	 was
shown as  no. 7	 and, therefore,  he was  not  selected.  He
complains that	he  was	 downgraded  from  the	third  place
without	 justification,	 and  if  the  Government  order  of
reservation of	18% had	 been kept  in view,  he should have
been selected  even if	he secured  the seventh place in the
merit list.
     In the  return to	the rule,  the	Additional  District
Judge of  Ghaziabad has	 indicated that	 the petitioner	 had
secured eighth	place in shorthand test and his name figured
as no. 3 in the list of successful candidates as it has been
drawn up in alphabetical order. At the interview he improved
his position  and was  ultimately shown	 as no.	 7.  In	 the
selection no  reservation had  been intended  to be  made in
view of	 the position  that  the  post	of  Stenographer  is
covered under  Class III  service and  the total strength of
Class III  employees in the judgeship of Ghaziabad as on May
1, 1982,  was 132  and there  were as  many as 28 among them
belonging to  the scheduled  castes which  came to more than
21%-3% above the reservation. An assertion was made that the
process of recruitment had been fair and bona fide.
     A rejoinder  has been filed by the petitioner accepting
the position  that "the	 written test and the interview were
done without  any "mala fide" but reiterating the contention
that  direction	  regarding  reservation  should  have	been
applied and the petitioner appointed on selection.
741
     It is  not the  case of  the answering  respondent that
reservation indicated  in Government  order of	1965 was not
applicable to  the relevant recruitment and the assertion of
the petitioner	that in	 the  previous	years  provision  of
reservation was	 implemented has also not been disputed. The
scheme	in   the  Government  order  contemplates  a  roster
register for every 25 vacancies and prescribes the following
mode:
     (1) 1 reserved for scheduled castes.
     (2) 2-6 unreserved.
     (3) 7 reserved for scheduled castes.
     (4) 8-12 unreserved.
     (5) 13 reserved for scheduled castes.
     (6) 14-18 unreserved.
     (7) 19 reserved for scheduled castes.
     (8) 20-24 unreserved.
     (9) 25 reserved for scheduled castes.
     Paragraph 2  of the Government order states: "if in any
particular year	 there are  only two vacancies, no more than
one should  be considered reserved and if there is only one,
that should  be considered unreserved; the reservation shall
be valid  up to	 three years". When six vacancies were being
filled up  at a	 time in  one year,  if the roster was to be
followed, one  of the  posts would indisputably have gone to
the candidate  of the  scheduled castes.  The stand taken in
the counter-affidavit that more than 21% of the posts in the
Grade III  cadre of  the judgeship  were being manned by the
people belonging  of the  scheduled castes  at the  relevant
time is	 no answer  to the prescription of the roster. It is
not known  whether some	 of the	 recruits of  earlier  years
already in  service belonging  to the  scheduled castes	 had
come on	 the basis  of overall	merit without  reference  to
reservation.
     On this premise, if the provision of reservation had to
be kept	 in view,  the petitioner  was bound  to  have	been
recruited. We  allow he	 petition. As per the roster, he was
entitled to be appointed
742
against	 the   first  vacancy.	We,  therefore,	 direct	 the
appointing authority  to  appoint  the	petitioner  in	that
vacancy and  five out  of the six who are respondents 3 to 8
before us  according to	 their position	 in final merit list
shall be retained.
     We make no order as to costs.
H.L.C.					   Petition allowed.
743




