

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
State Of Punjab vs Devinder Kumar & Ors on 7 April, 1983Equivalent citations: 1983 AIR  545, 1983 SCR  (2) 714
Author: E Venkataramiah
Bench: Venkataramiah, E.S. (J)
           PETITIONER:
STATE OF PUNJAB

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
DEVINDER KUMAR & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT07/04/1983

BENCH:
VENKATARAMIAH, E.S. (J)
BENCH:
VENKATARAMIAH, E.S. (J)
SEN, AMARENDRA NATH (J)

CITATION:
 1983 AIR  545		  1983 SCR  (2) 714
 1983 SCC  (2) 384	  1983 SCALE  (1)365


ACT:
     Prevention of  Food Adulteration Act, 1954-Ss. 7(i), 11
(1) (b),  Prevention of	 Food Adulteration Rules, 1955-Rules
22 and	22-A-Sample taken  after  opening  sealed  container
having larger quantity than required-If valid.
     Prevention of  Food Adulteration  Act, 1954-Ss.  19 (2)
and 20-A-Whether  dealer and  manufacturer  can	 be  jointly
tried with vendor.
     Criminal Procedure Code-S. 482-Scope of.
     Interpretation-Rule of.



HEADNOTE:
     On a complaint by the Food Inspector, who had purchased
1.5 k.g. of vanaspati as sample after opening one sealed tin
of 16.5	 k.g. out  of 20  such tins  kept by  the vendor for
sale,  criminal	 proceedings  were  instituted	against	 the
vendor, the  dealer and	 the manufacturer  of vanaspati	 for
violation of  s.7 (i) of the Prevention of Food Adulteration
Act, 1954  on the  ground that on analysis the vanaspati did
not satisfy  the prescribed standard. The facts of all these
cases are  more or  less the  same.  When  the	process	 was
issued, the  dealer and	 the manufacturer filed petitions in
the High  Court contending: (1) as the complainant had taken
the sample after opening a sealed tin, he had violated r.22-
A of  the Prevention  of Food  Adulteration Rules, 1955, (2)
under s.  20-A of the Act the dealer or a manufacturer could
be proceeded  against only  after the  vendor had  set up  a
successful  defence  as	 contemplated  under  s.  19(2)	 and
therefore  their  prosecution  along  with  the	 vendor	 was
illegal.
     The High  Court allowed  the petitions  and quashed the
proceedings on	the ground that where the food was in sealed
containers having  identical lable  declaration, the  entire
contents of  one or  more  of  such  containers	 as  may  be
required to  satisfy the quantity prescribed in r. 22 should
be taken  as a	part of	 the sample  and  since	 the  sealed
container had been opened to draw the sample the prosecution
was not tenable.
     Allowing the appeals,
^
     HELD: Rule	 22-A states  that where  food	is  sold  or
stocked for  sale or  for distribution	in sealed containers
having identical  lable declaration,  the contents of one or
more of	 such containers  as may  be required to satisfy the
quantity prescribed  in r.  22 shall be treated to be a part
of the	sample. Rule 22-A does not state that where a sealed
container contains a quantity larger
715
than what  is required for purposes of s. 11 read with r. 22
the sealed  container as  such should be taken as sample and
that no	 sample	 can  be  taken	 after	opening	 the  sealed
container. This	 rule is  enacted apparently to get over the
difficulty that	 may arise  in taking sample and in dividing
it into	 three parts as required by s. 11 (1) (b) where such
sealed container  containing the food in question contains a
quantity less  than the	 required quantity  to be  taken  as
sample for  purposes of s. 11 read with r. 22. The matter is
put beyond  doubt by  r. 22-B which, however, only reaffirms
the legal  position existing  before  that  rule  came	into
force. Rule  22-A  is  only  a	corollary  to  r.  22  which
prescribes the	quantity of  sample to be sent to the Public
Analyst for  analysis. The  inevitable	consequence  of	 the
acceptance of the argument of the accused which has appealed
to  the	  High	Court	is  that  where	 a  manufacturer  or
distributor sells  food-stuffs in  large  sealed  containers
containing quantities  much larger  than what is required to
be taken  as sample  under the	law and the contents of only
one such  container are	 exposed for  sale by a vendor after
opening the container, a Food Inspector would not be able to
take a	sample at  all for  proceeding under the Act against
the  manufacturer,  distributor	 or  even  the	vendor.	 Any
construction which  would lead	to such absurd result should
be avoided  while construing the provisions of the Act. [718
F-G, 719 A,718 G-H, 719-G, 719 E, 718 F, 719 A-C]
     State of  Kerala etc.  etc. v.  Alaserry Mohammad	etc.
etc., [1978] 2 SCR, 820, referred to.
     There seems  to be	 no logically sound reason why, if a
distributor or	a manufacturer can be subsequently impleaded
under s.  20-A of  the Act,  he cannot	be joined  as a	 co-
accused initially  in a	 joint trial if the allegations made
justify such a course. [722 C]
     Bhagwan Dass  Jagdish Chander  v. Delhi Administration.
[1975] Supp. SCR 30, followed.
     In the  instant  cases,  the  High	 Court	committed  a
serious	 error	in  quashing  the  criminal  proceedings  in
different   magistrates'   courts   in	 exercise   of	 its
extraordinary  jurisdiction   under  s.	  482  of   Criminal
Procedure Code. These are not cases, where there is no legal
evidence  at   all  in	 support  of  the  prosecution.	 The
prosecution has	 still	to  lead  evidence.  It	 is  neither
expedient nor  possible to  arrive at  a conclusion  at this
stage on  the guilt  or innocence  of  the  accused  on	 the
material before	 the  court.  High  Court  should  not	have
therefore interfered at this interlocutory stage. [722 D-F]
     State of  Punjab v. Sat Pal, Criminal Appeal No. 199 of
1983 decided on March 25, 1983, referred to.
     While construing  food laws  such as  the Prevention of
Food Adulteration  Act courts  should keep  in view that the
need for  prevention of	 future injury	is as  important  as
punishing  a   wrong  doer  after  the	injury	is  actually
inflicted. Merely because a person who has actually suffered
in his	health after consuming adulterated food would not be
before court  in such  cases, courts should not be too eager
to quash  on slender  grounds the  prosecutions for offences
alleged to have been committed under the Act. [718 D-E]
716



JUDGMENT:
     CRIMINAL APPELLATE	 JURISDICTION: Criminal	 Appeal Nos.
286-292 of 1981.
     Appeals by	 special leave	from the  Judgment and Order
dated the  24th April,	1980 of	 the Punjab  & Haryana	High
Court in  Criminal Misc.  Nos. 196,  198, 1565,	 1567, 1569,
1571 and 1573-M/80.
     D.D.Sharma for the appellant
     K.C. Dua for the Respondents (Not present)
     The Judgment of Court was delivered by
     VENKATARAMIAH. J. The above Criminal Appeals by Special
leave are filed against a common judgment delivered on April
24, 1980 by the High Court of Punjab and Haryana in Criminal
Misc. Nos.  196, 198,  1565, 1567,  1569, 1571 and 1573-M of
1980.
     By its judgment under appeal the High Court has quashed
certain	 criminal   proceedings	 instituted   in   different
Magistrates' courts  against different parties for violation
of section 7 (i) of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act,
1954 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Act'). Since the facts
in all	these cases  are more  or less	the same,  we  shall
briefly state  the facts  in one of them i.e. Criminal Misc.
No. 196-M  of 1980 on the file of High Court filed by Daljit
Vig. Works  Manager, Kishan  Chand &  Co. Oil Industry Ltd.,
Manufacturers of  Vanaspati at	Ludhiana  in  which  he	 had
prayed for  quashing the criminal proceedings which had been
initiated by  a	 complaint  filed  by  the  Government	Food
Inspector, District  Faridkot. In  that case the complainant
alleged that  when he  visited the  premises of	 Darshan Lal
(Accused No.  1) on  July 30, 1979 he found that Darshan Lal
had in	his possession	for purposes  of sale  about  twenty
sealed tins  each containing  16.5 K.  G. of crown vanaspati
and he	demanded a  sample of  crown vanaspati	by serving a
notice on  Darahan Lal	in the	form  prescribed  under	 the
Prevention of  Food Adulteration  Rules,  1955	(hereinafter
referred to  as 'the  Rules'). Thereafter  he purchased	 1.5
K.G. of	 crown vanaspati  after opening	 a  sealed  tin	 for
analysis by paying him Rs. 15/-. The sample was divided into
three equal parts and put into three dry and cleaned bottles
which were  labelled and  duly closed and sealed. One of the
bottles	 containing  the  sample  was  sent  to	 the  Public
Analyst, Punjab	 in a  sealed container,  through a  special
messenger alongwith  a memorandum  (Form No. VII) containing
the specimen of the seal and the
717
remaining two  bottles were  deposited with the Local Health
Authority, Faridkot  in accordance  with the  Rules. He also
seized the entire stock of vanaspati under section 10 (4) of
the Act.  After the  receipt of	 the Report  of	 the  Public
Analyst	 dated	August	24,  1979  he  filed  the  complaint
annexing the  Report as	 an enclosure to it. The said Report
stated that  on analysis  he (the Public Analyst) found that
the sample  sent to  him did  not contain  sesame oil at all
whereas vanaspati  was required	 to contain not less than 5%
by weight  of sesame  oil. The	three accused  named in	 the
complaint were	Darshan Lal,  the vendor, M/s. Hem Raj Pawan
Kumar, the  dealers and	 Kishan Chand  & Co.,  Oil  Industry
Ltd., the  manufacturers of  the vanaspati  contained in the
aforementioned sealed  tons. The complainant alleged that as
the vanaspati  in question  did not  satisfy the  prescribed
standard the  accused  were  liable  to	 be  punished  under
section 16 (1) (a) (i) of the Act for having contravened the
provisions of  section 7  (i)  of  the	Act.  The  names  of
witnesses including  the name  of the person in the presence
of whom	 the sample  had been  taken were  furnished in	 the
complaint. When process was issued on the basis of the above
complaint Daljit  Vig, the Works Manager of the manufacturer
of the	vanaspati in question filed Criminal Misc. No. 196-M
of 1980	 on the	 file of  the High Court. Criminal Misc. No.
198-M of 1980 was filed by Pawan Kumar of M/s. Hem Raj Pawan
Kumar. In these two petitions they pleaded that the criminal
proceedings initiated against them were liable to be quashed
on various grounds. They contended, inter alia, that because
the complainant	 had taken  the sample	of  vanaspati  after
opening a sealed tin, he had violated Rule 22-A of the Rules
and that  because under	 section 20-A of the Act, the dealer
or a  manufacturer could be proceeded against only after the
vendor had set up a successful defence as contemplated under
section 19  (2) of  the Act, their prosecution alongwith the
vendor was  illegal.  In  the  connected  cases	 which	were
disposed of by the common judgment under appeal, the grounds
were more  or less  the same. The High Court allowed all the
petitions  quashing   all  the	criminal  proceedings  filed
against the  petitioners before	 it on the ground that where
the food sold or stocked for sale or for distribution was in
sealed containers  having identical  label declaration,	 the
entire contents	 of one or more of such containers as may be
required to  satisfy the  quantity  prescribed	in  Rule  22
should be taken as a part of the sample in a sealed form and
since the  sealed container had been opened in each of these
cases to draw the sample the prosecution was not tenable. In
the instant  case it may by recalled that each of the sealed
containers  contained  16.5  K.G.  of  vanaspati  and  after
opening one such sealed container the complainant had
718
taken 1.5 K.G. of vanaspati as sample. The method adopted by
the complainant	 was found  by the High Court to be contrary
to the	relevant Rules.	 These appeals	by Special Leave are
filed against  the judgment  and order of the High Court. It
may be	stated	here  that  the	 High  Court  following	 its
decision in  these cases  quashed  the	proceedings  against
Darshan Lal,  the vendor  of the  vanaspati in	question, in
Criminal Misc.	No. 2197-M  of 1980  by its order dated June
17, 1980  against which	 a separate petition is filed before
this Court  in Special Leave Petition (Criminal) No. 2570 of
1980 which  is also  being disposed  of today  by a separate
order.
     Adulteration and misbranding of food stuffs are rampant
evils in our country. The Act is brought into force to check
these  social  evils  in  the  larger  public  interest	 for
ensuring public	 welfare. In  certain cases the Act provides
for imposition	of penalty  without proof  of a guilty mind.
This shows  the degree of concern exhibited by Parliament in
so far	as public health is concerned. While construing such
food laws  Courts should  keep in  view that  the  need	 for
prevention of  future injury  is as important as punishing a
wrongdoer after	 the injury  is actually  inflicted.  Merely
because a  person who  has actually  suffered in  his health
after consuming	 adulterated food  would not be before court
in such	 cases, courts	should not  be too eager to quash on
slender grounds	 the prosecutions  for offences,  alleged to
have been committed under the Act.
 Section 11	 of the	 Act prescribes	 the procedure to be
followed by  the Food  Inspectors in  taking samples of food
for analysis.  The quantity  of sample	to be  sent  to	 the
Public Analyst	for analysis is prescribed by Rule 22 of the
Rules. In  the case  of vanaspati  500 grams (approximately)
should be  sent to  the Public Analyst under that Rule. Rule
22-A states  that where	 food is sold or stocked for sale or
for distribution in sealed containers having identical lable
declaration, the  contents of one or more of such containers
as may	be required  to satisfy	 the quantity  prescribed in
Rule 22	 shall be  treated to  be a part of the sample. This
Rule is	 enacted apparently  to get over the difficulty that
may arise  in taking  sample and  in dividing  it into three
parts as  required by  section 11  (1) (b)  of the Act where
each  sealed  container	 containing  the  food	in  question
contains a  quantity less  than the  required quantity to be
taken as  sample for  the purposes  of section	11 read with
Rule 22.  Rule 22-A  of the  Rules was	promulgated for	 the
purpose of  overcoming an  objection to	 the effect that the
contents of two or more different sealed containers
719
could not  form the  parts of  the same sample. Rule 22-A of
the Rules  does not  state that	 where	a  sealed  container
contains  a  quantity  larger  than  what  is  required	 for
purposes  of  section  11  read	 with  rule  22	 the  sealed
container as  such should  be taken  as sample	and that  no
sample can  be taken  after opening the sealed container. It
may be	stated here  that the  inevitable consequence of the
acceptance  of	this  argument	of  the	 accused  which	 has
appealed to  the High  Court is that where a manufacturer or
distributor sells  food stuffs	in large  sealed  containers
containing quantities  much larger  than what is required to
be taken  as sample  under the	law and the contents of only
one such  container are	 exposed for  sale by a vendor after
opening the container, a Food Inspector would not be able to
take a	sample at  all for  proceeding under the Act against
the manufacturer,  distributor or  even the  vendor. We feel
that any construction which would lead to such absurd result
should be  avoided while  construing the  provisions of	 the
Act. The  precautions prescribed  in section  11 of  the Act
which have  to be  observed while  taking samples are indeed
adequate to  prevent effectively any false sample being sent
to the	Public Analyst.	 If there is any prejudice caused to
accused by  any negligence  on the  part of  the authorities
concerned in taking or sending the true sample to the Public
Analyst, the  prosecution may  have to	fail. But  there is,
however,  no   legal  requirement  which  compels  the	Food
Inspector to send the sealed container as such to the Public
Analyst even  though it contains a quantity much larger than
what is	 required to  be taken as sample under Rule 22. Rule
22-A is	 only a corollary to Rule 22. Rule 22-B sets at rest
many  doubts   which  were   being  raised   prior  to	 its
promulgation. It says :
	  "22-B. Quantity of sample sent to be considered as
     sufficent. Notwithstanding	 anything contained  in Rule
     22 quantity  of  sample  sent  for	 analysis  shall  be
     considered as  sufficient unless  the public analyst or
     the Director reports to the contrary."
     Even prior	 to the	 coming into force of Rule 22-B, the
legal position	was the	 same as  what was  attempted to  be
achieved by  Rule 22-B of the Rules. In State of Kerala etc.
etc v.	Alaserry Mohammed etc. etc. (1) this Court held Rule
22 which prescribed the quantity of food that should be sent
to  the	 Public	 Analyst  was  only  directory	and  that  a
prosecution could not fail merely on the
720
ground that the quantity sent to the Public Analyst was less
than what  was prescribed,  provided the  quantity which was
actually sent  was  sufficient	for  purposes  of  analysis.
Untwalia, J.  speaking on  behalf of the five learned Judges
who heard that case observed at page 828 thus :
	  "It would  thus be  seen that	 the whole object of
     section 11	 and Rule  22 is  to find  out by  a correct
     analyis subject  to further  verification and  tests by
     the Director of the Central Laboratory or otherwise, as
     to whether the sample of food is adulterated or not. If
     the quantity sent to the Public Analyst, even though it
     is less than that prescribed, is sufficient and enables
     the Public	 Analyst  to  make  correct  analysis,	then
     merely because  the quantity  sent was  not  in  strict
     compliance	 with  the  Rule  will	not  result  in	 the
     nullification  of	 the  report   and  obliterate	 its
     evidentiary value.	 If the quantity sent is less, it is
     for the  Public Analyst to see whether it is sufficient
     for his  analysis or  not. If he finds it insufficient,
     there is an end of the matter. If, however, he finds it
     sufficient but  due to  one reason or the other, either
     because of further tests or otherwise, it is shown that
     the report	 of the	 Public Analyst based upon the short
     quantity sent  to him  is	not  trustworthy  or  beyond
     doubt, the case may fail. In other words, if the object
     is frustrated  by the  sending of the short quantity by
     the  Food	Inspector  to  the  Public  Analyst,  it  is
     obvious, that the case may end in acquittal. But if the
     object  is	  not  frustrated   and	 is   squarely	 and
     justifiably achieved  without any shadow of doubt, then
     it will  endanger public  health to acquit offenders on
     technical grounds which have no substance. To quote the
     words of  Sir George  Rankin, C.J. from the decision of
     the Calcutta  High Court  in  Chandra  Nath  Bagchi  v.
     Nabadwip Chandra  Dutt and	 others A.I.R. 1931 Calcutta
     476 at  page 478,	it would  "be merely piling unreason
     upon technicality......."	In our	considered  judgment
     the Rule  is directory  and not  mandatory. But we must
     hasten to	reiterate what we have said above that, even
     so, Food  Inspectors should  take case to see that they
     comply with the Rule as far as possible..............
	  We may,  in passing,	note that the Rules have now
     been amended and Rule 22B has been added in 1977 ...
721
     In our  opinion, the  new Rule  has been  added for the
     purpose of	 clarifying  the  law  and  not	 by  way  of
     amending it.  The law, as we have enunciated it, was so
     even without Rule 22B and it is stated here to place it
     beyond any debate or doubt."
     It may  be noted  that in	none of	 these cases has the
Public Analyst	expressed the  opinion that  the quantity of
sample sent  to	 him  was  inadequate  for  the	 purpose  of
analysing it and to make a report as required by the Act. It
is unfortunate	that the  High Court  in deciding  the cases
before it  failed to  appreciate  and  follow  the  approach
adopted by  this Court	in Alaserry Mohammed's case (supra).
The decision  of the  High Court  on the above point cannot,
therefore, be sustained.
     The other	ground namely  that the dealer, manufacturer
or distributor	cannot be prosecuted alongwith the vendor by
impleading all	of  them  initially  as	 the  accused  in  a
prosecution under  the Act  is unsustainable  in view of the
decision of  this Court	 in Bhagwan  Dass Jagdish Chander v.
Delhi Administration (1). In that case after considering the
effect of section 19 (2), section 20 and section 20-A of the
Act, Court observed at pages 36-37 thus:
	  "We are also unable to accept as correct a line of
     reasoning found  in V.  N. Chokra v. The State A. I. R.
     1966   Punjab   421   and	 Food	Inspector,   Palghat
     Municipality v.  Setharam Rice & Oil Mills (1974) F. A.
     C. P. 534 and P. B. Kurup v. Food Inspector, Malappuram
     Panchayat (1969) Kerala Law Times, P. 845 that in every
     case under	 the  Act,  there  has	to  be	initially  a
     prosecution of  a particular seller only, but those who
     may have  passed on  or sold the adulterated article of
     food the vendor, who is being prosecuted, could only be
     brought in	 subsequently after  a warranty set up under
     section 19	 (2)  has  been	 pleaded  and  shown  to  be
     substantiated. Support  was sought	 for such  a view by
     referring to  the special provisions of Section 20A and
     Section 19	 (2) and Section 20 of the Act. A reason for
     section 20A  seems to  be that  the  prosecution  of  a
     person impleaded as an accused under Section 20A in the
     course of a trial does not require a separate sanction.
     Section 20A  itself lays  down that,  where  the  Court
     trying the offence is itself satisfied
722
     that a  "manufacturer, distributor	 or dealer  is	also
     concerned with  an offence",  for which  an accused  is
     being tried,  the necessary  sanction to prosecute will
     be deemed	to have	 been given. Another reason seems to
     be that such a power enables speedy trial of the really
     guilty parties.  We are  in agreement  with the view of
     the Delhi	High Court  that these special provisions do
     not take  away or	derogate  from	the  effect  of	 the
     ordinary provisions of the law which enable separate as
     well as  joint trials  of accused persons in accordance
     with the  provisions of the old. Sections 233 to 239 of
     Criminal Procedure Code. On the other hand, there seems
     no logically  sound reason	 why, if  a distributor or a
     manufacturer  can	 be  subsequently   impleaded  under
     Section 20A  of the  Act, he  cannot be joined as a co-
     accused initially	in a  joint trial if the allegations
     made justify such a course." (emphasis added)
     Before concluding we should observe that the High Court
committed a  serious error  in these  cases in	quashing the
criminal proceedings  in different  magistrates' courts at a
premature   stage   in	 exercise   of	 its   extraordinary
jurisdiction under  section  482  Criminal  Procedure  Code.
These are  not cases  where it	can be said that there is no
legal evidence	at all	in support  of the  prosecution. The
prosecution has	 still to  lead its  evidence. It is neither
expedient nor  possible to  arrive at  a conclusion  at this
stage on  the guilt  or innocence  of  the  accused  on	 the
material before	 the Court. While there is no doubt that the
onus of	 proving the  case is  on  the	prosecution,  it  is
equally clear  that the	 prosecution should  have sufficient
opportunity to adduce all available evidence.
     We are  of the  view that	on  the	 facts	and  in	 the
circumstances of  these criminal proceedings, the High Court
should not  have interfered  at	 this  interlocutory  stage.
These were  not cases  of that	exceptional character  where
continuance of	prosecution would  have resulted  either  in
waste of  public time and money or in grave prejudice to the
accused concerned. On the other hand this undue interference
by  the	  High	Court	has  been   responsible	 for   these
prosecutions in respect of grave economic offences remaining
pending for  a long  time. In  a similar  case in  State  of
Punjab v.  Sat Pal  decided by	us on March 25, 1983 we have
set aside  the order of the High Court and remanded the case
for disposal to the trial court.
723
Accordingly, we set aside the judgment and order of the High
Court in  each of  these appeals and remand the cases to the
respective magistrates'	 courts for  disposal in  accordance
with law. All the other contentions are left open.
     The appeals are accordingly allowed.
H.S.K.					    Appeals allowed.
724




