

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Municipal Corporation Of ... vs Mohd. Yasin Etc on 28 April, 1983Equivalent citations: 1983 SCR  (2) 999, 1983 SCC  (3) 229
Author: O C Reddy
Bench: Reddy, O. Chinnappa (J)
           PETITIONER:
MUNICIPAL CORPORATION OF DELHIAND OTHERS

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
MOHD. YASIN ETC.

DATE OF JUDGMENT28/04/1983

BENCH:
REDDY, O. CHINNAPPA (J)
BENCH:
REDDY, O. CHINNAPPA (J)
DESAI, D.A.

CITATION:
 1983 SCR  (2) 999	  1983 SCC  (3) 229
 1983 SCALE  (1)492


ACT:
     Tax and  fee, contradistinction-Fees  for	slaughtering
animals	 at  slaughter	houses	enhanced  by  the  Municipal
Corporation, eightfold	Legality of  the enhancement-Whether
the  enhanced	fee  for  slaughtering	animals	 was  wholly
disproportionate to the cost of the services and supervision
and therefore, not a fee, but a tax.



HEADNOTE:
     As per  the  rates	 fixed	in  the	 year  1953  by	 the
Municipal Corporation  of Delhi,  the slaughtering fees were
0.25 paise  for each animal, in the case of sheep, goats and
pigs  and  rupees  one	for  each  animal  in  the  case  of
buffaloes.  By	 a   Notification   dated   31.1.1968,	 the
Corporation purported  to enhance  the slaughtering  fee  in
both the  categories eightfold,	 with effect from February 1
1968. Some  butchers of	 the city questioned the revision of
rates on  the ground  that the	proposed  enhanced  fee	 was
wholly disproportionate	 to the	 cost of  the  services	 and
supervision and was in fact not a fee, but a tax.
     During the	 pendency of  the writ petitions in the High
Court, by  virtue of  an interim arrangement, the appellant,
was permitted  to collect  slaughtering fees  at double	 the
rates fixed  in 1953 and as a result thereof the Corporation
realised  a  sum  of  Rs.  4,24,494/-.	The  budget  of	 the
Corporation under item XIV-B showed a sum of Rs. 2,56,000 as
the expenditure	 involved in  connection with  the slaughter
houses. Comparing the amount of actual realisation of fee at
the  rates  permitted  by  the	court  with  the  amount  of
expenditure as	revealed by  the budget	 and excluding	from
consideration all  expenditure not  shown in the budget from
item XIV  B, the High Court came to the conclusion that even
if the original fee was doubled the amount realised would be
more than  sufficient to  meet the expenditure involved and,
therefore, there was no reason at all for increasing the fee
eightfold and  so the  proposed fee was no fee but a tax for
which there  is no  legislative mandate. Hence the appeal by
special leave.
     Allowing the appeal, the Court
^
     HELD: 1;1	The increase  of the  slaughtering fee	from
0.25 P	to Rs.	2.00 per animal in the case of small animals
and from rupee 1.00 to Rs. 8.00 in the case of large animals
was wholly justified, in the Circumstances of the case.
						  [1008 C-D]
     1:2 True,	the Municipal Corporation has realised a sum
of Rs.	4,24,494 way  of fees  at the  rate of Re. 00.50 per
animal in the case of sheep, goats
1000
and pigs  and Rs.  2 per  animal in  the case  of buffaloes,
whereas the  budget of	the M.C.D.  showed under  item XIV-B
that an	 amount of  Rs. 2,56,000  was expended in connection
with slaughter	houses. The  Items of expenditure covered by
item XIV-B of the Municipal Budget are evidently those items
of expenditure	which are  incurred directly and exclusively
in connection with slaughter houses. There are several other
items  of   expenditure	 the  whole  or	 part  of  which  is
attributable  to   slaughter  houses  like  the	 expenditure
involved in  the purchase, maintenance and the use of trucks
and other  vehicles for	 the removal of filth from slaughter
houses,	 conservancy,	petrol	oil  etc.,  the	 expenditure
incurred in  connection with  the maintenance of supervisory
staff like  a fulltime	Veterinary officer, Municipal Health
officer, Deputy	 Health officer and Zonal Head officers, the
cost of	 depreciation  of  the	buildings  and	fittings  in
slaughter houses,  expansion and  improvement  of  slaughter
houses for  utilities etc.  but actually  debited  to  other
heads of account under the Municipal budget. Apparently, the
High Court  was under  an erroneous impression that the fees
collected should  be shown  to	be  related  to	 expenditure
incurred directly  and exclusively  in connection  with	 the
slaughtering of	 animals in  its slaughter  houses and also,
shown as such in the Municipal budget. [1007 B-H, 1008 A-B]
     2. Vicissitudes  of time  and necessitudes	 of  history
contribute to  changes of philosophical attitudes, concepts,
ideas and  ideals and,	with them, the meanings of words and
phrases and  the language  itself. The	philosophy  and	 the
language of  the law  are no  exceptions. Words	 and phrases
take colour and character from the context and the times and
speak differently in different contexts and times. Words and
phrases have not only a meaning but also a content, a living
content, which breathes, and so, expands and contracts. This
is particularly	 so where  the words  and  phrases  properly
belong to other disciplines. "Tax" and "Pee" are such words.
They properly  belong to  the world  of public	finance	 but
since the  Constitution and the laws are also concerned with
Public Finance, these words have often been adjudicated upon
in an effort to discern their content. [1002 D-G]
     3. From  the decided  cases beginning from Commissioner
of Hindu  Religious Endowments,	 Madras v.  Shri Lakshmindra
Thirtha Swamiyar  [1954] S.C.R.	 1005 till date, it is clear
that: (i)  There is  no generic difference between a tax and
fee, though  broadly a	tax is a compulsory exaction as part
of  a	common	burden,	  without  promise  of	any  special
advantages to  classes of  tax payers  whereas a  fee  is  a
payment for services rendered; benefit provided or privilege
conferred; (ii)	 Compulsion is	not the	 hall  mark  of	 the
distinction between  a tax  and fee;  (iii) That  the  money
collected does not go into a separate fund but goes into the
Consolidated Fund does not also necessarily make a levy tax;
(iv) Though  a	fee  must  have	 relation  to  the  services
rendered, or the advantage conferred, such relation need not
be direct; a mere casual relation may be enough; (v) Further
neither the  incidence of  the fee  nor the service rendered
need be	 uniform, (vi)	That others besides those paying the
fees are  also benefited does not detract from the character
of the	fee; (vii)  In fact the special benefit or advantage
to the	payers of the fees may even be secondary as compared
with  the   primary  motive  of	 regulation  in	 the  public
interest; (viii)  Nor is  the court  to assume the role of a
Cost Accountant.  It is	 neither necessary  nor expedient to
weigh too meticulously the cost, of the services rendered
1001
etc. against  the amount  of fees  collected so as to evenly
balance the  two and  (ix) A  correlationship is all that is
necessary. Quid	 pro quo in the strict sense is not the only
true index of a fee; nor is it necessarily absent in a tax.
					[1006 E-H, 1007 A-B]
     Commissioner of H.R. & C.E., Madras v. Shri Lakshmindra
Thritha Swamiyar,  [1954] S.C.R.  1005; H.  H. Sudhundra  v.
Commissioner for  Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments,
[1963] Supp.  2 S.C.R.	302; Hingir-Rampur Coal Co. Ltd. and
others v.  The State  of Orissa	 and others,  [196] 2 S.C.R.
537;  H.  H.  Swamiji  v.  Commissioner	 Hindu	Religious  &
Chariiable Endowments Dept. and others, [1980] 1 S.C.R. 268;
Southern Pharmaceuticals  & Chemicals,	Trichur	 and  others
etc. v.	 State of  Kerala and  others, [1982]  1 S.C.R.	 519
referred to.



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal Nos. 2120 &
2125 of 1970.
     From the  Judgment and order dated the 17th April, 1970
of the	Delhi High  Court in Civil Writ Petitions Nos. 133 &
134 of 1968
     Kapil Sibal,  Rameshwar Dial, Adarsh Dial and S. Mittar
for the Appellants.
     K. B. Rohtagi for the Respondents.
     The following Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     CHINNAPPA REDDY,  J. BY  a notification  dated 31.1.68,
the Delhi Municipal Corporation purported to enhance the fee
for slaughtering  animals in  its slaughter  houses from Re.
00.25p to  Rs. 2.00  for each  animal, in the case of sheep,
goats and  pigs, and  li from  Re. 1.00 to Rs. 8.00 for each
animal, in  the case  of  buffaloes.  The  notification	 was
quashed by  the High  Court of	Delhi on the ground that the
Corporation was	 really proposing  to levy  a tax  under the
guise of enhancing the fee. The original rates were fixed in
March 1953  and the  revised rates  were to take effect from
February 1,  1968. Some	 butchers of the city questioned the
revision of  rates on  the ground that the proposed enhanced
fee was	 wholly disproportionate to the cost of the services
and supervision	 and was  in fact  not a fee, but a tax. The
High Court  accepted the  contention of the butchers on what
appears	 to   us  a   superficial  view	 of  the  facts	 and
principles. Fortunately,  the High  Court has  certified the
case as	 a fit	one for	 appeal under Art. 133 (1)(c) of the
Constitution and the matter is now before us.
1002
During the pendency of the writ petitions in the High Court,
by  virtue   of	 an   interim  arrangement,   the  Municipal
Corporation was	 permitted to collect fee at the rate of Re.
00.50p. per  animal in the case of sheep, goats and pigs and
Rs. 2.00  per animal  in the case of buffaloes. As a result,
the Municipal  Corporation realised a sum of Rs. 4,24,494 by
way of fee for slaughtering animals in its slaughter houses.
Now, the budget of the Municipal Corporation under item XIV-
B showed  a sum	 of Rs. 2,56,000 as the expenditure involved
in connection  with  the  slaughter  houses.  Comparing	 the
amount of  actual realisation  of fee at the rates permitted
by the	Court with  the amount of expenditure as revealed by
the budget  and excluding from consideration all expenditure
not show in the budget under item XIV-B, the High Court came
to the	conclusion that even if the original fee was doubled
the amount  realised would  be more  than sufficient to meet
the  expenditure  involved  and	 there	was,  therefore,  no
warrant at all for increasing the fee eight-fold. So, it was
said, the  proposed fee was no fee but a tax for which there
was no legislative mandate. We shall presently point out the
error into  which the  High Court  fell on  facts as well as
principle.
     A word  on interpretation.	 Vicissitudes  of  time	 and
necessitude,   of   history   contribute   to	changes	  of
philosophical attitudes,  concepts, ideas  and	ideals	and,
with them,  the	 meanings  of  words  and  phrases  and	 the
language itself.  The philosophy and the language of the law
are  no	 exceptions.  Words  and  phrases  take	 colour	 and
character  from	  the  context	 and  the  times  and  speak
differently in	different contexts  and times.	And,  it  is
worthwhile remembering	that word, and phrases have not only
a meaning  but	also  a	 content,  a  living  content  which
breathes,  and	 so,  expands	and   contracts.   This	  is
particularly so	 where the words and phrases properly belong
to other  disciplines. 'Tax'  and 'Fee' are such words. They
properly belong to the world of Public Finance but since the
Constitution and  the laws  are also  concerned with  Public
Finance, these	words have often been adjudicated upon in an
effect to discover their content.
 Commissioner of  Hindu Religious  Endowments, Madras v.
Shri Lakshmindra Thirtha Swamiyar(1) is considered the locus
classicus on  the subject  of the  contradistinction between
'tax' and  fee?. The  definition of  'tax' given  by Latham,
C.J. as "a compulsory exaction
1003
of money by public authority for public purposes enforceable
by law	and not payment for services rendered" was accepted,
by the	Court as  stating the essential characteristics of a
tax. Turning  to fees,	it was	said  "a  fee  is  generally
defined to  be a  charge for  a special	 service rendered to
individuals  by	  some	governmental  agency",	but  it	 was
confessed, "as	there may be various kinds of fee, it is not
possible to  formulate a definition that would be applicable
to all	cases". As regards the distinction between a tax and
a fee,	it was noticed that compulsion could not be made the
sole or	 even a	 material criterion for distinguishing a tax
from fee. It was observed that the distinction between a tax
and fee	 lay primarily	in the fact that tax was levied as a
part of	 a common  burden, while  a fee	 was a payment for a
special benefit	 or privilege.	But it	was noticed that the
special benefit	 or advantage  might  be  secondary  to	 the
primary motive	of regulation in the public interest, as for
instance in  the case  of registration fees for documents or
marriage licences.  It was  further noticed that Article 110
of the	Constitution appeared  to indicate  two	 classes  of
cases  where   'fees'  could   be  imposed:  (1)  where	 the
government simply  granted a  permission on  privilege to  a
person to do something-which otherwise that person would not
be competent  to do and extracted from him, in return, heavy
or moderate fees (ii) where the government did some positive
work for  the benefit of the person and money was taken as a
return for  the work  done or  services rendered, such money
not being  merged in  the public revenues for the benefit of
the general  public. It	 was however  made  clear  that	 the
circumstance  that   all  the	collections  went   to	 the
Consolidated Fund  of the  State and  not to a separate fund
may not be conclusive. The Court finally observed that there
was really no generic difference between the tax fees though
the Constitution  had,	for  legislative  purposes,  made  a
distinction between  a tax  and	 a  fee.  While	 there	were
entries in  the legislative  lists with	 regard	 to  various
forms of taxes, there was an entry at the end of each one of
the three  lists as  regards fees  which could	be levied in
respect of  any of  matters that  was included	in  it.	 The
implication seemed  to be  that fee had special reference to
governmental action  undertaken in  respect to	any of those
matters.
     In HH  Sudhandra v.  Commissioner for Hindu Religious &
Charitable Endowments(1), the Court reiterated the principle
that a levy in
1004
the nature  of a  fee did  not cease to be of that character
merely because	there  was  any	 element  of  compulsion  or
coerciveness present in it, and aided.
	  "Nor is  it a postulate of a fee that it must
     have  direct   relation  to  the  actual  services
     rendered  by   the	 authority  to	individual  who
     obtains the benefit of the service. If with a view
     to provide	 a specific service, levy is imposed by
     law and  expenses for  maintaining the service are
     met out  of the  amounts collected	 there being  a
     reasonable	 relation  between  the	 levy  and  the
     expenses incurred for rendering services, the levy
     would be  in the  nature of  a fee	 and not in the
     nature of	a tax  ....... but  a levy  will not be
     regarded as a tax merely because of the absence of
     unity in  its incidence,  or because of compulsion
     in the collection thereof, nor because some of the
     contributories do	not obtain  the same  degree of
     service as others may."
 In Hingir-Rampur  Coal Co.	 Ltd. & Ors. v. The State of
Orissa and  Ors.(1) the	 Court while  reiterating that there
was an element of quid pro quo between the person paying the
fee and the authority imposing it, said:
	  "If  specific	 services  are	rendered  to  a
     specific area or to a specific class of persons or
     trade or  business in  any local  area, and  as  a
     condition precedent  for the  said services  or in
     return for	 them cess  is levied  against the said
     area or  the said	class of  persons or  trade  or
     business, the  cess is  distinguishable from a tax
     and is described as a fee."
Later it was said:
	  "It is  true that when the legislature levies
     a	fee   for  rendering  specific	services  to  a
     specified area  or to  specified, class of persons
     or trade  or business,  in the  last analysis such
     services may  indirectly form  part of services to
     the public	 in general.  If  the  special	service
     rendered is distinctly and primarily meant for the
     benefit of a specified class or area the fact that
     in ben  fitting the  specified class  or area  the
     State as a whole may
1005
     ultimately and  indirectly be benefitted would not
     detract from  the character  of the levy as a fee.
     Where,   however,	 the   specific,   service   is
     indistinguishable	from  public  service,	and  in
     essence  is  directly  a  part  of	 it,  different
     considerations may	 arise. In  such a  case, it is
     necessary to enquire what is the primary object of
     the levy  and the	essential purpose  which it  is
     intended to  achieve. Its	primary object	and the
     essential purpose	must be	 distinguished from its
     ultimate or  incidental results  or  consequences.
     That is the true test in determining the character
     of the levy,"
 In H.H.  Swamiji v.  Commissioner,	 Hindu	Religious  &
Charitable Endowments  Department and  Ors.,(1) Chandrachud,
CJ. speaking  for the  Constitution  Bench,  emphasised	 the
necessity  as	well  as   the	sufficiency   of   a   broad
correlationship between	 the services  rendered and the fees
charged and  discounted the  attempts to go into minutiae to
discover meticulously  whether or not there was mathematical
equality. He said, "For the purpose of finding whether there
is a  correlationship between  the services  rendered to the
fee payers  and the fees charged to them, it is necessary to
know the  cost incurred	 for organising	 and  rendering	 the
services. But  matters involving  consideration	 of  such  a
correlationship	 are   not  required   to  be  proved  by  a
mathematical formula.  What has	 to be seen is whether there
is a  fair correspondence  between the	fee charged  and the
cost of	 services rendered to the fee payers as a class. The
further and  better particulars	 asked for by the appellants
under VI,  rule 5  of the  Civil Procedure  Code, would have
driven the  Court, had	the particulars	 been supplied, to a
laborious and  fruitless inquiry  into minute details of the
Commissioner's departmental  budget. A	vivisection  of	 the
amounts	 spent	 by  the   Commissioner's  establishment  at
different  places  for	various	 purposes  and	the  ad	 hoc
allocation by  the Court  of different	amounts to different
heads would  at best  have been	 speculative. It  would have
been no	 more possible for the High Court if the information
were before  it, than  it would	 be possible  for us  if the
information were  before us.  to find  out what	 part of the
expenses incurred  by the  Commissioner's  establishment  at
various places	and what  part of the salary of his staff at
those places should be allocated to the functions
1006
discharged by  the  establishment  in  connection  with	 the
services rendered  to the  appellants. We  do not  therefore
think that  any substantial prejudice has been caused to the
appellants by  reason of  the non-supply  of the information
sought by them."
     In Southern  Pharmaceuticals & Chemicals Trichur & Ors.
etc. v. State of Kerala & Ors. etc.,(1) A.P.Sen, J. speaking
for the Court noticed the broadening of the Court's attitude
and observed:
	  "It is  now increasingly realised that merely
     because the  collections for the services rendered
     or grant  of a  privilege or licence, are taken to
     the consolidated  fund of	the State  and are  not
     separately appropriated  towards  the  expenditure
     for  rendering  the  services  is	not  by	 itself
     decisive. That is because the Constitution did not
     con template  it to  be an essential element of- a
     fee that  it should be credited to a separate fund
     and not  to the  consolidated  fund.  It  is  also
     increasingly realised that the element of quid pro
     quo stricto  senso is not always a sine qua non of
     a fee. It is needle to streess that the element of
     quid pro  quo is  not necessarily	absent in every
     tax............
     The  Traditional	Concept	 of  Quid  Pro	Quo  Is
     Undergoing. A Transformation."
     What do  we learn	from these precedents? We learn that
is no  generic difference  between a  tax and  a fee, though
broadly a  tax is  a compulsory exaction as part of a common
burden, without promise of any special advantages to classes
of taxpayers  whereas  a  fee  is  a  payment  for  services
rendered,  benefit   provided	or   privilege	 conferred'.
Compulsion is not the hall-mark of the distinction between a
tax and	 a fee.	 That the money collected does not go into a
separate fund  but goes	 into the consolidated fund does not
also necessarily  make a  levy a tax. Though a fee must have
relation  to   the  services  rendered,	 or  the  advantages
conferred, such	 relation need not be direct . a mere causal
relation may  be enough.  Further, neither  the incidence of
the fee	 nor the  service rendered  need  be  uniform.	That
others besides those paying the fees are also benefited does
not detract  from the  character of  the fee.  In  fact	 the
special benefit	 or advantage  to the payers of the fees may
even be secondary as com-
1007
pared with  the primary	 motive of  regulation in the public
interest. Nor  is the  Court to	 assume the  role of  a cost
accountant. It	is neither  necessary nor expedient to weigh
too meticulously  the cost  of the  services  rendered	etc.
against the amount of fees collected so as to evenly balance
the two.  A broad  correlationship is all that is necessary.
Quid pro  quo in  the strict  sense is	not the one and only
true index of a fee; nor is it necessarily absent in a tax.
     What do  we have  in  the	present	 case  ?  True,	 the
Municipal Corporation  has realised a sum of Rs. 4,24,494 by
way of	fees at	 the rate  of Re.  00.50p. per animal in the
case of sheep, goats and pigs and Rs. 2.00 per animal in the
case of	 buffaloes, whereas  the  budget  of  the  Municipal
Corporation showed  under item	XIV-B that  an amount of Rs.
2,56,000 was  expended in  connection with slaughter houses.
But as explained in the affidavit of Dr. A. C. Ajwani Deputy
Health officer	(Public Health) of the Municipal Corporation
of Delhi, the amount of Rs. 2,56,000 covers only those items
of expenditure	as  are	 reflected  in	item  XIV-B  of	 the
Municipal Budget.  The items  of expenditure covered by item
XIV-B of  the municipal	 budget are  evidently those item of
expenditure which  arc incurred	 directly and excessively in
connection with	 slaughter houses.  In	addition  there	 are
several other  items of expenditure connected with slaughter
houses but  which are  not included in item XIV-B. To name a
few, .	there is  the expenditure  involved in the purchase,
maintainance and  the use  of trucks  and other vehicles for
the removal of filth and refuse from slaughter houses. These
expenses,  though  attributable	 to  slaughter	houses,	 are
debited in  the municipal  budget under	 other heads such as
transport, conservancy,	 petrol and  oil etc.  There is also
the expenditure incurred in connection with the maintainance
of supervisory	staff like  a full  time Veterinary officer,
and a Municipal Health officer, Deputy Health officer, Zonal
Health officer etc., a considerable part of those duties are
connected with	slaughter houses.  There is then the cost of
depreciation of	 the buildings and fittings in the slaughter
houses. There  is  also	 the  provision	 for  expansion	 and
improvement of slaughter house facilities. There are several
other items  of expenditure  the whole	or part	 of which is
attributable to	 slaughter houses.  Unfortunately, the	High
Court refused  to look	at any	of these formidable items of
expenditure on the ground that the Corporation could not ask
the Court  to look  at any  figures other  than	 the  figure
mentioned  under   item	 XIV-B	 of  the  municipal  budget.
Aparently the  High Court  was under the impression that the
fees collected should be shown to be related to
1008
expenditure incurred  directly and exclusively in connection
with the slaughtering of animals in its slaughter houses and
also, shown  as such  in the  municipal budget.	 This was  a
wholly erroneous approach, in the light of what we have said
earlier. We have explained earlier that the expenditure need
not be	incurred directly  nor even  primarily in connection
with the  special benefit  or advantage	 conferred. We	have
also  explained	 that  there  need  not	 be  any  fastidious
balancing of the cost of the services rendered with the fees
collected. It  appears to have been common ground before the
High Court that the price of meat had gone up about 10 to 12
times since  the rates	were  original	fixed.	If  so,	 one
wonders how  the Municipal  Corporation could be expected to
effectively discharge its obligations in connection with the
supervision of	the slaughtering of animals in the slaughter
houses maintained by it by merely raising the rates two-fold
and three-fold. The increase from Re. 00.25p to Rs. 2.00 per
animal in the case of small animals and from Re. 1.00 to Rs.
8.00 in the case of large animals appears to us to be wholly
justified in  the circumstances	 of the	 case. The appeal is
therefore, allowed with costs the judgment of the High Court
set aside  and the  Writ Petition  filed in  the High  Court
dismissed with costs.
S.R.					     Appeal allowed.
1009




