

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Dr. Vijay Kumar Kathuria & Anr vs State Of Haryana & Ors on 29 April, 1983Equivalent citations: 1983 SCR  (2)1037, 1983 SCC  (3) 333
Author: V Tulzapurkar
Bench: Tulzapurkar, V.D.
           PETITIONER:
DR. VIJAY KUMAR KATHURIA & ANR.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF HARYANA & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT29/04/1983

BENCH:
TULZAPURKAR, V.D.
BENCH:
TULZAPURKAR, V.D.
ERADI, V. BALAKRISHNA (J)

CITATION:
 1983 SCR  (2)1037	  1983 SCC  (3) 333
 1983 SCALE  (1)580


ACT:
     Supreme Court  Rules, 1966, order XLI, Rule 2 read with
Order XLVII,  Rule 6  and Order XVI, Rule 4 Special Leave to
appeal and interim orders of status quo ante, as on the date
of filing  obtained by	false representation to the Court-By
reason of  such conduct not only the special leave petitions
should be  dismissed and  the interim  order, cancelled, but
costs should be awarded under Order XLI, Rule 2.



HEADNOTE:
     The petitioners,  filed two petitions for special leave
to appeal  and also  obtained interim  orders of  status quo
ante as	 on 1.10.82 averring that they were continuing their
studies	 as   post-graduate  students  of  Medical  College,
Rohtak. Since  a dispute  was raised whether the provisional
admissions granted  to them  had continued  till October  1,
1982 or were cancelled long prior to that date, an issue was
sent to the District Judge, Rohtak for inquiry and a finding
thereon. The  said  report  contained  not  only  a  finding
against the  petitioners, but  also  revealed  how  the	 two
petitioners and	 their counsel have indulged in telling lies
and  making   reckless	 allegation   of   fabrication	 and
manipulation of	 records against the college authorities and
how in fact the boot was on their leg.
     Dismissing the petitions, the Court
^
     HELD:  (1)	  It  is  clear	 from  the  report  that  on
1.10.1982, the	petitioners made  a false  representation to
the Supreme Court that they were continuing their studies as
post  graduate	 students  of  Medical	College,  Rohtak  on
1.10.1982 and  obtained an  order of  status quo  ante as of
that date  to be  maintained from  this Court.	But for	 the
misrepresentation this	Court would  never have	 passed	 the
said order. By reason of such conduct, they have disentitled
themselves from	 getting any  relief or assistance from this
Court and  the special	leave petitions	 are  liable  to  be
dismissed. [1038 F-H]
     (2) In  view of their conduct, the petitioners will pay
a  sum	of  Rs.	 2,500.00  each	 by  way  of  costs  to	 the
respondents. [1039 E]
     [The Court	 took a	 lenient  view,	 on  the  tender  of
apology by  the counsel	 on his	 own behalf and on behalf of
the petitioners	 and awarded only costs under order XLI Rule
2, instead  of drastic action by the respective professional
bodies to which they belonged.]
1038



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION : Special Leave Petitions
(Civil) Nos. 9009 and 9010 of 1982.
     From the  Judgment and  Order dated  the  21st  day  of
September, 1982	 of the	 High Court  of Punjab	& Haryana at
Chandigarh in C.W.P. No. 2484/82 and 2479/82.
     Dr.  Adarsh   Kapoor  and	Mrs.  V.D.  Khanna  for	 the
petitioner.
     K.G. Bhagat,  Additional Solicitor	 General and  R.  N.
Poddar with him for the respondents.
     The Order of the Court was delivered by
     TULZAPURKAR,J. In the above matters since a dispute was
raised as  to whether  the provisional admissions granted to
the two	 petitioners had continued till 1st October, 1982 or
were cancelled long prior to that date, an issue was sent to
the District Judge Rohtak for inquiry and a finding thereon.
The District  Judge Rohtak was required to submit his report
within a specified time. Later for some reasons, which it is
unnecessary to	mention, the  enquiry was transferred to the
District Judge,	 Hissar who  has now submitted his report to
this Court  through his	 letter dated  4th  February,  1983.
After holding  a full-fledged  enquiry during  the course of
which oral  as well  as documentary evidence was produced by
the parties  in support	 of their  respective versions,	 the
District  Judge	  has  recorded	  a  finding   against	 the
petitioners to	the effect  that to  their  knowledge  their
provisional admissions	had been  cancelled by the concerned
Authorities much  before the crucial date namely, 1.10.1982.
In  other   words,  it	 is  clear  that  on  1.10.1982	 the
petitioners made  a false  representation to this Court that
they were continuing their studies as post-graduate students
of Medical  College Rohtak on 1.10.82, and obtained an order
of status  quo as  of that  date to  be maintained from this
Court. But  for the misrepresentation this Court would never
have passed  the said  order. By reason of such conduct they
have disentitled  themselves  from  getting  any  relief  or
assistance from	 this Court  and the Special Leave Petitions
are liable to be dismissed.
     Counsel for  the petitioners attempted to challenge the
finding recorded  by the  District Judge as also some of his
observations made  against the	petitioners but	 after going
through the  report and other material and after considering
all the contentions urged against
1039
it we are satisfied that it is a very thorough, balanced and
satisfactory report  and  we  accept  the  finding  recorded
therein. In  view of this C.M.P. No. 27798 of 1982 taken out
by the	petitioners for	 contempt as  also the Special Leave
Petition Nos, 9009/82 and 9010/82 deserve to be dismissed.
     Before parting  with the  case, however, we cannot help
observing  that	  the  conduct	 or  behaviour	of  the	 two
petitioners as	well as	 their counsel	(Dr. A.K. Kapoor who
happens	 to  be	 a  medico-legal  consultant  practising  in
Courts) is most reprehensible and deserves to be deprecated.
The District  Judge's report  in that behalf is eloquent and
most revealing	as it points out how the two petitioners and
their counsel,	(who also  gave evidence  in support  of the
petitioner's case  before the  District Judge) have indulged
in  telling   lies  and	  making  reckless   allegation	  of
fabrication and	 manipulation of records against the College
Authorities and	 how in fact the boot is on their leg. It is
a sad  commentary on  the  scruples  of	 these	three  young
gentlemen who  are on  the threshold  of their	carriers. In
fact, at  one stage  we were  inclined to refer the District
Judge's report	both to	 the Medical  Council as well as the
Bar Council  for appropriate  action but  we refrained	from
doing so  as the  petitioners' counsel both on behalf of his
clients as  well as  on his  own behalf tendered unqualified
apology and  sought mercy  from the Court. We, however, part
with the  case with  a heavy  heart  expressing	 our  strong
disapproval of	their conduct  and behaviour but direct that
the petitioners	 will pay  a sum of Rs. 2,500 each as by way
of costs  to the  respondents. The two S.L.Ps and C.M.P. are
thus dismissed	with the  aforesaid direction  in regard  to
payment of costs.
S.R.					Petitions dismissed.
1




