

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Jai Bhagwan vs The Management Of The Ambala ... on 29 September, 1983Equivalent citations: 1984 AIR  286, 1984 SCR  (1) 158
Author: O C Reddy
Bench: Reddy, O. Chinnappa (J)
           PETITIONER:
JAI BHAGWAN

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
THE MANAGEMENT OF THE AMBALA CENTRAL COOPERATIVE BANKLIMITED

DATE OF JUDGMENT29/09/1983

BENCH:
REDDY, O. CHINNAPPA (J)
BENCH:
REDDY, O. CHINNAPPA (J)
DESAI, D.A.
VARADARAJAN, A. (J)

CITATION:
 1984 AIR  286		  1984 SCR  (1) 158
 1983 SCC  (4) 611	  1983 SCALE  (2)528


ACT:
     Industrial	 Disputes   Act,  1947-Domestic	  enquiry-No
charge	sheet  or  show	 cause	notice	for  termination  of
services issued-No  indication of  guilt of  employee in the
report-Services	    terminated-Enquiry-Whether	    violates
principles of  natural justice-Failure	to appeal  to higher
authority, whether bars tribunal's jurisdiction.



HEADNOTE:
     There was	a complaint  from an  account holder  of the
respondent bank	 that his account was wrongly debited with a
big sum	 of money  even though	he had never issued a cheque
for  that  sum.	 The  appellant,  a  clerk-cum-cashier,	 was
apparently suspected  to be responsible for the presentation
of the	cheque. The  bank lodged a complaint with the police
but  the   appellant  was  eventually,	discharged.  In	 the
meanwhile, the	bank placed him under suspension. An enquiry
as to  the  genuineness	 of  the  customer's  complaint	 was
ordered. The  appellant was  advised to	 be present  at	 the
enquiry but  no charge-sheet  was ever served on him. In his
report, the  enquiry officer  stated that  "there  lies	 the
possibility that  the complaint	 of  the  applicant  may  be
genuine." But there was no indication in the report that the
appellant had  anything to  do with  the presentation of the
cheque.	 Yet,  on  basis  of  this  report  the	 appellant's
services were terminated. Thereafter the appellant raised an
industrial dispute.  The Industrial  Tribunal, rejecting the
appellant's contention	that principles	 of natural  justice
had not been observed upheld the order of termination of his
services.
     In the  workman's appeal to this Court it was contended
on behalf of the respondent that the appellant ought to have
pursued the  remedy of	appealing to the Board of Management
against the  order of  termination and	his failure to do so
disentitled him from raising any industrial dispute.
     Allowing the appeal,
     HELD:  The	  order	 terminating  the  services  of	 the
appellant  was	 wholly	 unsustainable.	  The  appellant  is
entitled to  be reinstated  with continuity  of service from
the date of termination of his services. There was total non
application of	the mind by the Tribunal. [161 G; 164 D; 162
H]
     There was	a total	 breach of the principles of natural
justice: the appellant was never asked to answer any charge;
there was no enquiry against him; no
159
notice was  issued to  him to  show cause  why his  services
should not  be terminated and even the order terminating his
services failed	 to mention any reason. The Bank should have
led necessary  evidence to  prove  the	charge	against	 the
appellant. None	 of the three witnesses examined by the Bank
could either  prove that the cheque was a forgery or that it
had been  presented by	the appellant.	The enquiry  was not
directed against  the appellant	 but was held with a view to
find out  whether there	 was any  truth	 in  the  customer's
complaint.  The	  enquiry  officer  did	 not  say  that	 the
appellant  was	guilty	or  had	 anything  to  do  with	 the
presentation of the bogus cheque. The complainant, who would
have been  the most  crucial witness, was not examined. [161
F; H; 162 A; C-E]
     Notwithstanding all  this,	 by  a	curious	 process  of
reasoning  the	Industrial  Tribunal  upheld  the  order  of
termination,  dismissing  the  appellant's  contention	that
principles of  natural justice	had not	 been observed.	 The
Tribunal's observation	that strict  rules of  evidence were
not applicable	to domestic enquiries and that "not too much
legalism was  expected in  such	 matters  from	the  enquiry
officer" was  far from	correct.  In  short,  the  Tribunal,
without applying  its mind  to the  facts of  the  case	 and
without bothering  to peruse  the records,  gave a  findings
that the  termination of  his services	was  justified.	 The
Tribunal's findings and conclusion were therefore worthless.
				       [162 B-C; H; 163 B-C]
     Raising an	 industrial dispute is a well-recognised and
legitimate mode of redress available to a workman, which has
achieved statutory recognition under the Act and there is no
reason why  a statute-recognised  mode of  redress should be
denied to a workman because of the existence or availability
of another  remedy. Nor has an industrial tribunal, to which
a dispute  had been  referred for adjudication, the power to
refuse to  adjudicate upon it and surrender its jurisdiction
to some	 other authority.  While the Government may exercise
its discretion	to refer  or not  to  refer  a	dispute	 for
adjudication, once a dispute is referred to it, the Tribunal
has no	discretion to  decide whether  to adjudicate or not.
The Tribunal has to resolve the dispute. The Tribunal cannot
avoid it on the ground that the workman had failed to pursue
some other remedy. [163 G-H; 164 A-B]
     The  attempt  to  connect	the  order  terminating	 the
appellant's services  with his	absence from the bank on two
days was  an attempt  made for	the first  time before	this
Court. It  cannot be  allowed to  be raised  now. The letter
dated 17th  September, 1974  addressed to  the appellant had
nothing to  do	with  the  presentation	 of  the  cheque  or
withdrawal of money, but related to his absence from duty on
two days  in August 1974 and his signature said to have been
found in the attendance register on those days. [164 B-C;163
A-B]
     The workman  has awarded  half back wages from the date
of termination	of service  to the date of judgment and full
wages thereafter  to the date of reinstatement on the ground
that he	 raised	 the  dispute  after  a	 considerable  delay
without doing anything in the meanwhile. [164 E]



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Civil  Appeal  No.	5274
(NL) of 1983.
160
     Appeal by	Special leave  from the	 Judgment and  Order
dated the 4th March, 1982 of the Industrial Tribunal Haryana
at Faridabad  in Reference  No. 79/80  published in  Haryana
Govt. Gazette dated the 6th June, 1982.
			    AND
	       Civil Appeal No. 5275 of 1983
     Appeal by	Special leave  from the	 Judgment and  Order
dated the 16th day of August, 1982 of the Punjab and Haryana
High Court in Writ Petition No. 3475 of 1983.
     Ms. Chander  Malhotra &  Mrs.  Indra  Sawhney  for	 the
Appellant in both the Appeals.
     K.B. Rohtagi for the Respondent in both the appeals.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     CHINNAPPA REDDY,  J. Shri	Phulel Singh  had a  savings
account with the Naraingarh branch of the Ambala Central Co-
operative Bank	Limited. A cheque for Rs. 4200 purporting to
have been  signed by  Shri Phulel Singh, drawn on the Ambala
Central Co-operative Bank was presented through the Punjab &
Sind Bank  Limited,  Dhulkot  and  the	proceeds  were	duly
remitted to  the latter	 bank. The  account of	Shri  Phulel
Singh was  debited with	 that amount. Later when Shri Phulel
Singh presented	 his pass  book,  appropriate  entries	were
made. Shri  Phulel Singh  objected to  the entry relating to
the debit  of Rs.  4200. He alleged that he had never issued
the cheque  for Rs.  4200 said to have been issued by him. A
complaint was  also lodged  with  the  police.	The  present
appellant,  who	 was  clerk-cum-cashier	 of  the  Naraingarh
Branch of  the bank,  and who  was apparently  suspected  in
connection with	 the presentation  of the  bogus cheque, was
interrogated by	 the  police  and  his	statement  was	also
recorded. A  First Information Report was registered against
him, but  the case ended in discharge. In the meanwhile, the
Managing Committee  of the  bank placed	 the appellant under
suspension.  Shri   Hans  Raj,	 an  Assistant	Manager	 was
appointed to  enquire into  the matter in order to ascertain
the genuineness	 of the	 complaint made by the customer. The
appellant was advised to be present at the Naraingarh branch
of the bank on
161
July 29, 1974 in connection with the enquiry. No chargesheet
was ever  issued to  the appellant.  The  statement  of	 the
appellant was  however recorded	 by the	 enquiry officer  on
July 29,  1974 along  with the	statements of  several other
persons. The  enquiry officer submitted his report on August
21,  1974.  The	 finding  of  the  enquiry  officer  may  be
extracted here. It was as follows:-
	  "As a	 result of  enquiry and	 on the basis of the
     points given  in the report, there lies the possibility
     that the complaint of the applicant may be genuine."
The enquiry officer thus indicated that there might be truth
in the	complaint of  the customer  that a  bogus cheque was
presented and  his account  debited with  the amount.  There
was,  however,	 no  indication	  in  the  report  that	 the
appellant, Jai Bhagwan was guilty or had anything to do with
the presentation of the bogus cheque. Thereafter, on January
31, 1975,  the appellant  was informed that his services had
been  terminated   with	 immediate  effect.  No	 reason	 was
mentioned in  the order	 terminating  the  services  of	 the
appellant. We  have  no	 information  nor  was	his  learned
counsel in  a position	to tell us as to any immediate steps
taken by  the appellant to question the order of termination
of his	services. But  he did ultimately raise an industrial
dispute and by an order dated December 15, 1980 the Governor
of Haryana  referred the  following dispute for adjudication
to the Industrial Tribunal, Haryana at Faridabad:
	  "Whether the	termination of	services of Shri Jai
     Bhagwan was  justified and	 in order  ? If not, to what
     relief is he entitled ?"
     Even from	the brief  narration of facts, it is obvious
that there  was a  total breach of the principles of natural
justice.  The  appellant  was  never  asked  to	 answer	 any
charges, there	was no	enquiry against	 him, no  notice was
issued to  him to  show cause why his services should not be
terminated and	even  the  order  terminating  his  services
failed to  mention any	reason. The  order  terminating	 the
services of  the appellant  was	 wholly	 unsustainable.	 If,
therefore, the	bank wanted to sustain the order terminating
the services of the appellant, it was up to the bank to lead
necessary evidence  to prove  such charges  as it desired to
establish against  the appellant. The bank made an effort by
adducing  the	evidence  of   three   witness	 MW-I,	 the
Establishment Officer, MW-II, Assistant
162
Manager, Karnal	 and MW-III,  the Enquiry  Officer, none  of
whom could  either prove  that the  cheque was	a forgery or
that it	 had been  presented by	 the appellant.	 Shri Phulel
Singh, who would have been the most crucial witness, was not
examined. In  the absence  of the  evidence of	Shri  Phulel
Singh, no  case could possibly be said to have been made out
against the  appellant. Yet  by a  very curious	 process  of
reasoning, the	Industrial  Tribunal  upheld  the  order  of
termination of	the appellant's	 services. He  dismissed the
contention that	 principles of	natural justice had not been
observed with  the observation that strict rules of evidence
were not  applicable to domestic enquiries and "not too much
legalism was  expected in  such	 matters  from	the  enquiry
Officer." We  are unable  to understand	 what the Industrial
Tribunal meant.	 There was  not the  slightest semblance  of
observance of the principles of natural justice. The enquiry
made by	 the enquiry  officer was  not directed	 against the
appellant, but	was held  with a  view to  find out  whether
there was  any truth  in the  complaint of the customer that
somebody had  presented a  bogus cheque	 and drawn  Rs. 4200
from his  account. The	report of  the enquiry	officer also
contained no  finding against  the appellant. At no time was
the appellant  informed of  any charges	 against him  or his
explanation sought.  Commenting on the report of the enquiry
officer, the Industrial Tribunal stated:
	  "I have gone through the documents produced by the
     management and  found that	 the  enquiry  officer	took
     great pain	 in finding out the facts of the case as was
     evident from  his report  Ex. M-8	which was dated 21st
     August, 1974.  The report	gives minute  details and is
     logical. The  enquiry officer reached the conclusion by
     going through  the records	 of the bank and also of the
     drawee branch  of	Punjab	&  Sind	 Bank,	Dhulkot	 and
     ascertaining the person in whose account the sum of Rs.
     4200 was  deposited and also the connection of Shri Jai
     Bhagwan  concerned	 workman  with	that  person.  I  am
     convinced	by  reading  the  enquiry  report  that	 the
     concerned workman	was involved  into  withdrawal	and,
     therefore, he was found guilty by the Enquiry Officer."
This shows  a total  non-application  of  the  mind  by	 the
Industrial Tribunal  since the	appellant  was	never  found
guilty by  the enquiry officer. The Industrial Tribunal also
stated that a final show cause notice had been issued to the
workman on September 17, 1974 in
163
which the  findings of	the  enquiry  officer  were  briefly
given.	This  is  another  indication  that  the  Industrial
Tribunal never	applied his  mind to  the issues before him.
The letter  dated September 17, 1974 had nothing whatever to
do with	 the presentation of the cheque or the withdrawal of
the  money.  It	 was  concerned	 with  the  absence  of	 the
appellant from	duty on	 August 13  and	 14,  1974  and	 the
signatures  said  to  have  been  found	 in  the  attendance
register against the dates August 13 and 14, 1974. Thus, the
Industrial Tribunal, apparently without applying his mind to
the facts  of the  case and without bothering even to peruse
the records,  gave a  finding that  the termination  of	 the
services of  the workman were justified and in order. We are
constrained to reject the findings and the conclusion of the
Industrial Tribunal  as entirely  worthless.  The  appellant
filed a writ petition in the High Court of Punjab & Haryana,
but the	 writ petition was unfortunately summarily rejected.
The workman  has filed	these two  appeals under Art. 136 of
the Constitution, one against the decision of the Industrial
Tribunal and  the other against the summary dismissal of the
writ petition by the High Court. Both the appeals have to be
allowed in the circumstances mentioned by us.
     Shri Rohatgi,  learned counsel for the Respondent-Bank,
was  unable   to  contend  that	 there	was  even  a  remote
compliance with	 the principles	 of natural  justice. He was
also unable  to urge  that the Industrial Tribunal had truly
applied his  mind to  the case. He, however, argued that the
appellant had  a remedy	 against the order of termination of
services by  way of an appeal to the Board of Management and
that his  failure to  pursue that  remedy  barred  him	from
raising any Industrial dispute. He also attempted to connect
the order of termination of services with the absence of the
workman from  the bank	on August  13 and  14, 1974, on days
when his  signature was found in the attendance register. We
see no	substance in  either of	 the submissions. Raising an
industrial dispute  is a well recognised and legitimate mode
of redress  available  to  a  workman,	which  has  achieved
statutory recognition  under the Industrial Disputes Act and
we fail	 to see	 why the  statute-recognised mode of redress
should be  denied to  a workman	 because of the existence or
availability  of   another  remedy.   Nor  are	we  able  to
understand how	an Industrial Tribunal to whom a dispute has
been referred for adjudication can refuse to adjudicate upon
it and	surrender jurisdiction	which it  undoubtedly has to
some other  authority. While  the  Government  may  exercise
their discretion in
164
deciding whether  to refer  or not  to refer  a dispute	 for
adjudication, the  Tribunal to	whom the  dispute  has	been
referred has  no discretion  to decide whether to adjudicate
or not.	 Once a	 reference has	been  properly	made  to  an
Industrial Tribunal,  the dispute has to be duly resolved by
the Industrial Tribunal. Resolution of the dispute cannot be
avoided by  the Tribunal  on the ground that the workman had
failed to  pursue some	other remedy.  The attempt  of	Shri
Rohatgi to  connect the	 order terminating  the	 appellant's
services with his absence from the bank on August 13 and 14,
1974 is	 an attempt made before us for the first time. At no
earlier stage  was the	order  of  termination	of  services
sought to  be sustained	 on the	 basis of the absence of the
workman from  the bank	on August 13 and 14, 1974. It cannot
be done now.
     The appellant  is, therefore, entitled to be reinstated
in service with continuity of service from the date on which
his  services	were  terminated.   Having  regard   to	 the
circumstance that  the workman	raised an Industrial dispute
after considerable  delay  without  doing  anything  in	 the
meanwhile to question the termination of his services, we do
not think  that we  will be  justified in awarding full back
wages. We  think that  award of half the back wages from the
date of	 termination of	 service until to day and full wages
from this  day until  reinstatement will  meet the  ends  of
justice. The  appellant will  be entitled to his costs which
we quantified at Rs. 5,000.
P.B.R.	  Appeal allowed.
165
