

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Gunendra Prasad Sen Gupta vs Union Of India And Others on 3 May, 1983Equivalent citations: 1983 SCR  (3)	 6, 1983 SCC  (3) 303
Author: E Venkataramiah
Bench: Venkataramiah, E.S. (J)
           PETITIONER:
GUNENDRA PRASAD SEN GUPTA

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
UNION OF INDIA AND OTHERS

DATE OF JUDGMENT03/05/1983

BENCH:
VENKATARAMIAH, E.S. (J)
BENCH:
VENKATARAMIAH, E.S. (J)
FAZALALI, SYED MURTAZA

CITATION:
 1983 SCR  (3)	 6	  1983 SCC  (3) 303
 1983 SCALE  (1)516


ACT:
     Service Jurisprdence-Seniority  and Promotion to higher
post-Assurance given  to the  employee that his seniority in
the post  to which  he was  initially appointed	 on his	 re-
transfer   would    be	 considered-Departmental   Promotion
Committee  first   rejecting  to   consider  the   case	 for
empanelling for	 promotion for	want of personal records and
later when  available refuses to reopen the case-Legality of
the refusal Estoppel by conduct, applicability of.



HEADNOTE:
     The appellant  was working	 as a  Godown-Keeper in	 the
northern region	 of the	 Food Corporation  of Delhi.  He was
transferred to	the eastern  region at	his own	 request  on
March 1,  1961. In  August 1962, the Union of India issued a
circular to  the effect	 that an officer who was transferred
from one  region to  another at	 his own  request should  be
treated as a fresh entrant in the cadre to which he belonged
in the	latter region  for the purpose of seniority and thus
thereby such  an officer  will forfeit his past services. In
the Seniority  List of	1969, the appellant's name was shown
at S.  No 261 but in the seniority list of 1972 his name was
shown against  SI. No.	266 and	 as a  result  four  of	 his
juniors	  were	  promoted.    The    appellant's    several
representations against	 the said  promotions having failed,
he filed  a writ petition in the Calcutta High Court praying
for a  mandamus directing  the respondents either to forbear
from giving effect to the promotions or to transfer him back
to Northern  region restoring his seniority. As per the High
Court's	 orders,   the	Joint	Personnel  Manager   of	 the
Corporation wrote  to the  Zonal  Manager  (E)	at  Calcutta
assuring that  the seniority  position of  appellant in	 the
Northern region	 prior to his transfer to the Eastern region
would be  restored to  him. After  his	re-transfer  to	 the
Northern region,  the  appellant  found	 that  some  of	 his
juniors had  already been  promoted. On	 his representation,
the Departmental  Promotion Committee  empanelled him in the
1976 panel  and refused	 to empanel  him from  1970  on	 the
ground of non-availability of service records. But when they
were  traced   and  produced,	the  Departmental  Promotion
Committee refused  to empanel his name in the 1970 List with
a cryptic  resolution to  the effect  that "on	the basis of
records of  his service,  his case  cannot be reopened". His
representations against	 the said  resolution having failed,
the appellant  filed a writ petition in the Delhi High Court
which was  dismissed in	 limine. Hence the appeal by Special
Leave.
     Allowing the appeal, the Court
^
     HELD: 1:1	The resolution of the Zonal Committee passed
in May 1979 stating that the case of the appellant could not
be reopened has to be
7
treated as  non-est and	 ineffective one  in the eye of law.
The Zonal Promotion Committee had not considered the case of
the appellant  for the	purpose of including him in the 1970
panel. The re-opening of a case arises only when it has been
once considered and a decision is taken thereon. [10 G-H, 11
A-B]
     1:2  The  resolution  passed  by  the  Zonal  Promotion
Committee means	 that it  was not willing to reopen the case
of the	appellant on  the basis	 of his service records. The
resolution does	 not show  that the  Committee had  in	fact
considered the suitability of the appellant for promotion to
a higher  post at  the time when his juniors were empanelled
for the	 purposes of  promotion. If  it	 had  done  so,	 the
Committee would	 have recorded	in its	resolution that	 the
appellant had  been found  to be  unsuitable  for  promotion
during the  relevant time.  When his case came up before the
Committee for  the  first  time	 in  December  5,  1977,  it
deferred the  consideration of	his case  on the ground that
the relevant Confidential Reports were not available. Having
thus deferred the consideration of the case of the appellant
on that	 occasion, the Zonal Promotion Committee should have
considered his	case when  the relevant Confidential Reports
were placed  before it	and passed an appropriate resolution
instead of  remarking that  his case  could not be reopened.
[10C G]



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE JURSIDICTION : Civil Appeal No. 4061 of
1983
     Appeal by	Special leave  from the	 Judgment and  Order
dated the 11th March, 1981 of the Delhi High Court in C.W.P.
No 371 of 1981.
     A. Ganguli for the Appellant.
     K. C. Keshav Dayal, A. V: Rangam and .G. Gopalakrishnan
with him for the Respondents.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     VENKATARAMIAH, J.	The appellant  is an employee of the
Food Corporation  of India  (hereinafter referred to as 'the
Corporation'). For  purposes of	 administrative	 convenience
the entire  territory of  India	 in  which  the	 Corporation
carries on  its operations  is divided into several Regions.
The appellant was working as a Godown Keeper in the Northern
Region in  the year  1961. At  his request the appellant was
transferred to the Eastern Region on March 1, 1961. In July,
1962, a	 circular was  issued by  the Government of India to
the effect  that an  officer who  was transferred  from	 one
Region to  another at his own request should be treated as a
fresh entrant  in the  cadre to	 which he  belonged  in	 the
latter Region for the purpose
8
of seniority, that is, his seniority should be reckoned only
from the  date of  joining duty	 in a particular post in the
new Region and as such he would not be entitled to claim the
benefit of  service in	the particular	post in	 the  former
Region for  the purpose of seniority in the same post in the
latter Region to which he was transferred. The circular also
stated that  it would  apply to	 all cases  of transfers  of
officials made	on or  after March 1, 1960. In the seniority
list dated  November 1,	 1969, the  name  of  the  appellant
appeared against  S. No. 261 but in the seniority list dated
May 10,	 1972, the  appellant's name was shown against S. N.
266. In	 view of the seniority list dated May 10, 1972, four
persons who  had  been	considered  to	be  juniors  to	 the
appellant earlier  were	 promoted  in  supersession  of	 the
claims	of   the  appellant.   The  appellant  made  several
representations to  the authorities  concerned	against	 his
supersession in which he questioned the applicability of the
above said  circular issued  in July, 1962 to him. Since the
appellant was not given any reply, he filed a petition Civil
Rule No.  6044 (W)/72  under Article 226 of the Constitution
before the  High Court of Calcutta on July 14, 1972. In that
petition, he  prayed for  a writ  in the  nature of mandamus
directing the  respondents therein,  namely, the Ministry of
Food and  Agriculture, Government  of  India,  the  Regional
Director (Food),  Eastern Region,  Government of  India, the
Joint  Manager	(Port  Operations)  and	 the  Zonal  Manager
(Eastern Zone),	 Food Corporation  of India  to forbear from
giving effect  to the aforementioned circular in his case or
in the	alternative to	transfer him  back to  his  original
place of  posting in  the Northern  Region with	 his  former
seniority. By  its order  dated May 13, 1974, the High Court
of Calcutta  issued a  writ in the nature of mandamus to the
respondents in	that petition  to consider  the case  of the
petitioner for	transfer  back	to  his	 original  place  of
posting in  the Northern  Region within	 two months from the
date  of   the	communication  of  that	 order.	 After	some
correspondence,	 the   Joint  Personnel	  Manager   of	 the
Corporation at	New Delhi  wrote to the zonal Manager (E) of
the Corporation	 at Calcutta  that the seniority position of
appellant in  the Northern  Region prior  to his transfer to
the Eastern  Region would  be restored	to  him.  The  Zonal
Manager, Calcutta  conveyed the	 above	information  to	 the
appellant by  his letter dated September 1, 1976. Thereafter
the appellant  was transferred	to the	Northern  Region  in
November, 1976.	 After he  joined his  post in	the Northern
Region, the  appellant realised that some of his juniors had
been promoted  to higher positions during the period when he
had been  working in the Eastern Region. He, therefore, made
a
9
representation on September 4, 1978 to the Managing Director
of the	Corporation that  his cases  for  promotion  to	 the
higher cadre  should be considered with effect from the date
on which  his immediate	 junior had been promoted. He made a
further representation	to  the	 Personnel  manager  of	 the
Corporation, on August 27, 1979 making a similar request. On
January 20, 1980, he wrote to the Manager (Establishment) of
the Corporation	 about his grievance and on January 30, 1980
to the	Zonal Manager  (North) of  the Corporation. As these
representations yielded	 no result,  the appellant  filed  a
writ petition  under Article  226 of the Constitution before
the High  Court of Delhi in C.W.P. No. 371/81. That petition
was dismissed  in limine by the High Court of Delhi on March
11, 1981.  This appeal by special leave is preferred against
the aforesaid order of the High Court.
     The case  of the  appellant is  that since	 he had been
reposted to  the Northern Region with the seniority which he
hold before  he was  transferred to  the Eastern Region, the
Corporation should  consider his  case for  promotion to the
higher cadre  as on  the date  on which his immediate junior
was promoted  and if he is found fit he should be given such
promotion and  placed above  his  immediate  junior  in	 the
seniority list.	 He also  claims that  he should be accorded
all consequential benefits.
     In this  Court, the  Corporation has  filed  a  counter
affidavit the  deponent of  which is Shri Madhusudan, Deputy
Manager (Admn.),  of the  Corporation. In  the said  counter
affidavit, it  is admitted that before the appellant was re-
transferred to	the Northern  Region, he  had been  given an
assurance that his seniority in the Northern Region prior to
his transfer  to the Eastern Region would be restored. It is
further stated	that the  case of  the appellant  was placed
before the  Zonal Promotion  Committee of the Corporation at
its meeting  held on  December 5,  1977 for  considering his
case for  promotion to the post of Assistant Manager (Depot)
against 1970  panel wherein  his juniors were empanelled. As
the Confidential  Reports relating  to the appellant for the
years 1966  to 1968 were not available for assessment of his
suitability, the Zonal Promotion Committee deferred his case
but the	 appellant was,	 however,  empanelled  against	1976
panel  on   the	 basis	 of  the   available  reports.	 The
Confidential Reports  for the  years 1966 to 1968 were later
on traced  and the  case of  the appellant  was again placed
before the  Zonal Promotion Committee at its meeting held in
May, 1979 for considering his claim for inclusion in
10
the 1970  panel. Thereupon  the	 Zonal	Promotion  Committee
passed a cryptic resolution to the effect that `on the basis
of records  of his service, his case cannot be reopened'. It
is contended  on behalf	 of the	 Corporation that  since the
promotion in  question one  to	be  made  on  the  basis  of
selection, the	appellant is  not entitled to any relief. It
may be mentioned here that the appellant was not informed by
the Corporation that the Zonal Promotion Committee had found
him unsuitable	for being  included in	the 1970  panel. The
records pertaining to the proceedings of the Zonal Promotion
Committee are  not also	 placed before	us.  The  resolution
passed by  the Zonal Promotion Committee does not convey the
meaning which  the Corporation wants to attribute to it viz.
that  the   Zonal  Promotion   Committee  had	found  on  a
consideration of  the relevant Confidential Reports that the
appellant was  unsuitable for  being included  in  the	1970
panel.	The   resolution  passed   by  the  Zonal  Promotion
Committee means	 that it  was not willing to reopen the case
of the	appellant on  the basis	 of his service records. The
resolution does	 not show that the Zonal Promotion Committee
had in	fact considered the suitability of the appellant for
promotion to a higher post at the time when his juniors were
empanelled for purposes of promotion. If it had done so, the
Zonal  Promotion   Committee  would  have  recorded  in	 its
resolution  that   the	appellant   had	 been  found  to  be
unsuitable  for	 promotion  during  the	 relevant  time.  It
appears	 that	the  Zonal   Promotion	Committee   had	 not
considered the	case of	 the appellant	in the	year 1977 in
accordance with	 law. As  mentioned earlier when the case of
the appellant  came up	before the Zonal Promotion Committee
for the	 first time  on December  5, 1977,  it deferred	 the
consideration of  the case  of the  appellant on  the ground
that the  relevant Confidential	 Reports were not available.
Having thus  deferred the  consideration of  the case of the
appellant on  that occasion,  the Zonal	 Promotion Committee
should have  considered the  case of  the appellant when the
relevant Confidential  Reports were  placed  before  it	 and
passed an  appropriate resolution  instead of remarking that
the case  of  the  appellant  could  not  be  reopened.	 The
reopening of  a case  arises only  when	 it  has  been	once
considered and a decision is taken thereon. Since we have no
material before	 us to	show that  there  has  been  such  a
consideration earlier, the resolution of the Zonal Promotion
Committee passed  in May,  1979 stating	 that  case  of	 the
appellant could	 not be	 reopened has  to be  treated as  an
ineffective one	 in  the  eye  of  law.	 It  is,  therefore,
difficult to  accept the  submission made  on behalf  on the
Corporation that  the case  of the  appellant had  been duly
considered by the Zonal Promotion Committee for the purpose
11
of including  him in the 1970 panel. In these circumstances,
we  have   no  option  but  to	issue  a  direction  of	 the
Corporation to	consider the case of the appellant for being
included in the 1970 panel. We accordingly allow this appeal
and issue  a direction	to the	Corporation to	consider the
case of	 the appellant for promotion as on the date on which
his immediate  junior in  the Northern	Region in  the	year
1972, that is, Respondent No. 13 was promoted and if on such
consideration the  appellant is found suitable for promotion
to promote  him to the higher cadre and place him above such
immediate junior  in higher  cadre. If	the appellant  is so
promoted,  the	 Corporation  shall   also  give   him	 all
consequential benefits	but he	would not be entitled to any
arrears of  salary (the difference between the salary of the
higher post  and salary he had actually drawn) upto the date
on which  he rejoined his duties in the post in the Northern
Region after he was retransferred.
     There will be no order as to costs.
S.R.					     Appeal allowed.
12




