

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Commissioner Of ... vs Shantilal Private Llmited Bombay on 21 July, 1983Equivalent citations: 1983 AIR  952, 1983 SCR  (3) 470
Author: R Pathak
Bench: Pathak, R.S.
           PETITIONER:
COMMISSIONER OF INCOME-TAXBOMBAY CITY-III, BOMBAY

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
SHANTILAL PRIVATE LlMITED BOMBAY

DATE OF JUDGMENT21/07/1983

BENCH:
PATHAK, R.S.
BENCH:
PATHAK, R.S.
SEN, A.P. (J)
VENKATARAMIAH, E.S. (J)

CITATION:
 1983 AIR  952		  1983 SCR  (3) 470
 1983 SCC  (3) 561	  1983 SCALE  (2)37


ACT:
     Income-Tax Act,  1961-Sub-s. (5)  of s.  43-Speculative
transaction. A	transaction  where  there  is  a  breach  of
contract and  damages are  awarded  as	compensation  by  an
arbitration award is not a speculative transaction.
     Words and phrases-Speculative transaction-Meaning of.



HEADNOTE:
     The respondent  assessee claimed  that  a	sum  of	 Rs.
1,50,000 paid  by them	as compensation	 for being unable to
fulfil a  contract was	a  business  loss.  The	 Income	 tax
officer	 rejected   the	 claim	 on  the   ground  that	 the
transaction was a speculative transaction as defined by sub-
s. (5)	of s.  43 of the Income-tax Act, 1961. The Appellate
Assistant Commissioner	held that  the loss  was a  business
loss and not a speculative loss on the view that the payment
made represented  a settlement	of damages  on breach of the
contract, which	 was  distinct	from  a	 settlement  of	 the
contract. The  Income Tax  Appellate Tribunal  confirmed the
order  of  the	Appellate  Assistant  Commissioner.  On	 the
request of  the Commissioner  of  Income-tax  the  Appellate
Tribunal has referred the question whether the loss suffered
by the	assessee was not a loss in a speculative transaction
within the meaning of s. 43(5) of the Income-tax Act, 1961.
     Answering the question in the affirmative,
^
     HELD:  A	transaction  cannot   be  described   as   a
"speculative trans  action" within the meaning of sub-s. (5)
of s.  43 where	 there is  a breach of the contract and on a
dispute	 between   the	parties	  damages  are	 awarded  as
compensation by an arbitration award. [474 A-B]
     Sub-s. (5)	 of s.	43 speaks  of the  settlement  of  a
contract. A contract can be said to be settled if instead of
effecting  the	 delivery  or	transfer  of  the  commodity
envisaged by the contract the promisee, in terms of s. 63 of
the Contract  Act, accepts  instead of	it any	satisfaction
which he  thinks fit.  It  is  quite  another  matter  where
instead of  such acceptance  the parties raise a dispute and
no agreement can be reached for a discharge of the contract.
There is  a breach of the contract and by virtue of s. 73 of
the Contract  Act the party suffering by such breach becomes
entitled to  receive from  the party  who broke the contract
compensation for  any loss  or damage caused to him thereby.
There is  no reason  why  the  sense  conveyed	by  the	 law
relating to  contracts	should	not  be	 imported  into	 the
definition of "speculative transaction" What
471
is really  settled by  the award  of such  damages and their
acceptance by the aggrieved party is the dispute between the
parties. [473 A, C-G]
     Commissioner of  Income-Tax,  West	 Bengal	 v.  Pioneer
Trading Company	 Private Ltd.,	70 ITR	347; Bhandari Rajmal
Kushiraj v.  Commissioner of  Income Tax, Mysore, 96 ITR 401
approved.
     R. Chinnaswami  Chettiar v. Commissioner of Income-Tax,
Madras, 96 ITR 353 overruled.
     P.L. KN.  Meenakshi Achi v. Commissioner of Income-Tax,
Madras, 96 ITR 375; A. Muthukumara Pillai v. Commissioner of
Income-Tax, Madras,  96 ITR  557 and Devenport & Co. P. Ltd.
v. Commissioner	 of Income-Tax,	 West Bengal  11, (1975) 100
ITR 715 not relevant to the point raised.



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Tax Reference Case No. 4
of 1978.
     Tax Reference  Under Section 257 of the Income Tax Act,
1961 made  by the  Income  Tax	Appellate  Tribunal,  Bombay
(Bench 'C').
     D. V.  Patel, T.  A. Ramachandran	& Miss A. Subhashini
for the Appellant.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     PATHAKJ, J.  In this tax reference made under S. 257 of
the income  Tax Act, 1961, we are called upon to express our
opinion on the following question of law:
	  "Whether,   on   the	 facts	 and   in   the
     circumstances of  the case, the Tribunal was right
     in confirming the order of the Appellate Assistant
     Commissioner  that	  the  loss   suffered	by  the
     assessee was  not a loss incurred in a speculative
     transaction within	 the meaning  of Sec. 43 (5) of
     the Income-tax Act, 1961 ?"
     The assessee,  M/s Shantilal  Pvt. Ltd.,  Bombay, is  a
private limited	 company. In  the assessment proceedings for
the assessment year 1971-72 it claimed a sum of Rs. 1,50,000
paid by	 it as	damages to  M/s Medical	 Service Centre as a
business loss. During the previous year relevant to the said
assessment year	 the assessee  had contracted  to  sell	 200
Kilograms of  Folic Acid  USP at  the rate  of Rs.  440	 per
Kilogram to M/s. Medical Service Centre and the delivery was
to be  effected on  or before November 1, 1969, within about
three months of the date of entering into the contract. The
472
case of	 the assessee  is that as the price of the commodity
rose very  sharply to  as high	as Rs.	2,000  per  Kilogram
during the  period when the delivery was to be effected, the
assessee was unable to fulfil the contract, giving rise to a
dispute in regard to the payment of compensation between the
parties. The  dispute was  referred to arbitration and by an
award dated  August  25,1970  the  arbitrator  directed	 the
assessee to pay Rs. 1,50,000 as compensation to M/s. Medical
Service Centre.	 A consent  decree in terms of the award was
made by the High Court.
     In the  assessment proceedings,  the Income Tax officer
rejected the  claim of	the assessee  that  the	 payment  of
compensation  was   a  business	 loss.	He  found  that	 the
transaction was	 a speculative	transactions as	 defined  by
Sub-s. (5)  of s.  43. Income  Tax Act,	 1961. The Appellate
Assistant Commissioner	allowed the assessee's appeal on the
view that the payment made by it represented a settlement of
damages on breach of the contract, which was distinct from a
settlement of  the contract.  Accordingly, he found that the
loss must  be regarded	as a  business loss  and  not  as  a
speculation  loss.  The	 Income	 Tax  officer's	 appeal	 was
dismissed by  the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal by its order
dated February	18, 1976.  The Commissioner  of	 Income	 Tax
applied in  reference for  a decision on the question of law
set out earlier, and in view of an apparent conflict between
different High	Courts on  the point  the Tribunal  has made
this reference.
     There is  no doubt	 that the arbitration award granting
compensation to	 M/s. Medical Service Centre proceeds on the
footing that  there was	 a breach  of contract. The Tribunal
took the  view that  the award	of damages  for breach	of a
contract did not bring the transaction within the definition
of "speculative	 transaction" set  forth in sub-s. (5) of s.
43, Income  Tax Act,  1961.  In	 this,	the  Tribunal  found
support in  the view expressed by the Calcutta High Court in
Commissioner of	 Income-Tax, West  Bengal v. Pioneer Trading
Company Private Ltd.,(1) Daulatram Rawatmull v. Commissioner
of Income-Tax  (Central), Calcutta(2) and by the Mysore High
Court  in  Bhandari  Rajmal  Kushalroj	v.  Commissioner  of
Income-tax, Mysore,(9)	which they  preferred  to  the	view
expressed  by  the  Madras  High  Court	 in  R.	 Chinnaswami
Chettiar v. Commissioner of Income
473
Tax, Madras.,(1)  P.L. KN. Meenakshi Achi v. Commissioner of
Income-Tax, Madras(a)  and A.  Muthukumara Pillai v. Commis-
sioner of Income-Tax, Madras.(3) on cereful consideration of
the matter  we are  of opinion	that the  Tribunal is right.
Sub-s. (5)  of s.  43 defines  "speculative transaction"  to
mean:
     "a	 transaction   in  which  a  contract  for  the
     purchase  or  sale	 of  any  commodity,  including
     stocks and	 shares, is  periodically or ultimately
     settled otherwise	than by	 the actual delivery or
     transfer of the commodity or scrips ...."
Is a  contract for purchase or sale of any commodity settled
when no	 actual delivery  or transfer  of the  commodity  is
effected, and  instead compensation  is	 awarded  under	 and
arbitration award  as damages for breach of the contract ? A
contract can  be said  to be settled if instead of effecting
the delivery  or transfer  of the commodity envisaged by the
contract the  promisee, in  terms of  s. 63  of the Contract
Act, accepts  instead of it any satisfaction which he thinks
fit. It	 is quite  another  matter  where  instead  of	such
acceptance the parties raise a dispute an d no agreement can
be reached  for a  discharge of	 the contract.	There  is  a
breach of  the contract	 and by	 virtue	 of  s.	 73  of	 the
Contract Act  the party	 suffering by  such  breach  becomes
entitled to  receive from  the party  who broke the contract
compensation for  any loss  or damage caused to him thereby.
There is  no reason  why  the  sense  conveyed	by  the	 law
relating to  contracts	should	not  be	 imported  into	 the
definition  of	 "speculative  transaction".  The  award  of
damages for  breach of a contract is not the same thing as a
party to the contract accepting satisfaction of the contract
otherwise  than	  in  accordance  with	the  original  terms
thereof. It  may be that in a general sense the layman would
understand that	 the contract  must be	regarded as  settled
when damages are paid by way of compensation for its breach.
What is	 really settled	 by the	 award of  such damages	 and
their acceptance  by the  aggrieved  party  is	the  dispute
between	 the   parties.	 The   law,  however,  speaks  of  a
settlement of  the contract,  and a contract is settled when
it is  either performed	 or the	 promisee dispenses  with or
remits, wholly	or in  part, the  performance of the promise
made to	 him or accepts instead of it any satisfaction which
he thinks  fit. We  are concerned with the sense of the law,
and it is
474
that sense  which must	prevail in-  sub-s. (5)	 of  s.	 43.
Accordingly, we	 hold that a transaction cannot be described
as a  "speculative transaction" within the meaning of sub-s.
(5) of	s. 43,	Income Tax Act, 1961 where there is a breach
of the contract and on a dispute between the parties damages
are awarded  as compensation by an arbitration award. We are
unable to  endorse the	view to	 the contrary  taken by	 the
Madras High  Court in  R.  Chinnaswami	Chettiar(supra)	 and
approve of  the view  taken by	the Calcutta  High Court  in
Pioneer Trading	 Company Private  Ltd. (supra)	and  by	 the
Mysore High  Court in Bhandari Rajmal Kushalra; (supra). The
decisions of  the Madras High Court in P. L. K. N. Meenakshi
Achi (supra)  and A.  Muthukumara  Pillai  (supra)  are	 not
apposite and are not concerned with the point before us. Our
attention was  invited by learned counsel for the Revenue to
the decision  of this  Court in	 Devenport  o.	P.  Ltd.  v.
Commissioner of Income-Tax, West Bengal II(1) but this point
did not arise there either.
     Accordingly, we  answer the  question referred  in	 the
affirmative, in	 favour of  the	 assessee  and	against	 the
Revenue. There is no order as to costs.
H.S.K.			   Question answered in affirmative.
475
