

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Smt. P. Grover vs State Of Haryana And Anr on 18 August, 1983Equivalent citations: 1983 AIR 1060, 1983 SCR  (3) 654
Author: O C Reddy
Bench: Reddy, O. Chinnappa (J)
           PETITIONER:
SMT. P. GROVER

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF HARYANA AND ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT18/08/1983

BENCH:
REDDY, O. CHINNAPPA (J)
BENCH:
REDDY, O. CHINNAPPA (J)
VENKATARAMIAH, E.S. (J)

CITATION:
 1983 AIR 1060		  1983 SCR  (3) 654
 1983 SCC  (4) 291	  1983 SCALE  (2)172


ACT:
     Civil Service-Can a person promoted to a post on acting
basis be  denied the benefit of the scale of pay attached to
the post ?
6
     The  appellant   was  promoted  as-an  acting  District
Education officer  but the  order of  promotion contained  a
super-added condition  that she	 would continue	 to draw her
salary in  her existing scale of pay as a teacher. She filed
a writ	petition contending that she was entitled to the pay
of a  District Education  Officer but the same was dismissed
by the High Court.
     Allowing the appeal,



HEADNOTE:
     HELD: The	counter affidavit  filed on  behalf  of	 the
Government of  Haryana offers  no rational  explanation	 for
denying	 the  pay  of  District	 Education  officer  to	 the
appellant  after   she	was  promoted  to  act	as  District
Education Officer.  In the  absence of	any rule  justifying
such refusal  to pay to an officer promoted to a higher post
the salary of such higher post, the appellant is entitled to
be paid	 the salary of a District Education officer from the
date she was promoted to the post. [655 F-G]



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 6229 of
1983.
     Appeal by	Special leave  from the	 Judgment and  order
dated the  29th May,  1980 of  the Punjab  and Haryana	High
Court in C.W.P. No. 1225 of 1980.
     K.G. Bhagat,  Addl. Soliciter  General and	 K. K. Mohan
for the appellant.
     R. N. Poddar For the Respondent.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by:
     CHINNAPPA REDDY, J. Special leave granted.
655
     Smt. P.  Grover was an outstanding teacher. In 1968-69,
the Government	of Haryana  honoured her  by presenting	 the
State  Award   for  teachers.	She  attained	the  age  of
superannuation on  August 2s0,	1978. About two years before
she attained  the age of superannuation, she was promoted as
acting District	 Education Officer with effect from July 19,
1976. The  Government of Haryana had taken a policy decision
as early  as in	 1965 that the Services of teachers, who had
received the  National or  State Awards,  should be extended
until they  attained the age of 60 years, on an year by year
basis,	if   their  service  record  continued	to  be	good
otherwise. Pursuant  to the  policy decision,  Smt. Grover's
services were  extended first  by  one	year  and  later  by
another year. During the period of extension of service, she
worked as  Principal, Government  Higher  Secondary  School,
Mahendergarh. She finally retired from service on August 31,
1980.
     We	 mentioned  that  she  was  promoted  as  an  acting
District Education  officer with  effect from July 19, 1976.
The order  of promotion	 contained a  super-added  condition
that she would draw her own pay scale which apparently meant
that she  would continue to draw her salary on her pay scale
prior to promotion. The initial order extending her services
recited that  she was  an acting District Education Officer,
but contained a super-added condition that her pay would not
be more	 than the  maximum of  the Principal's	grade.	Smt.
Grover	claims	 that  having	been  promoted	as  District
Education officer, she was entitled to the pay of a District
Education officer and there was no justification for denying
the same  to her. A writ petition filed by her was dismissed
by the High Court of Punjab and Haryana and she is before us
by way	of special leave under Art. 136 of the Constitution.
The counter-affidavit  filed on	 behalf of the Government of
Haryana offers	no rational  explanation for denying the pay
of District  Education Officer	to Smt.	 P. Grover after she
was promoted  to act as District Education officer. All that
was said  in the  counter-affidavit was	 that there  were no
Class-I post  available and  therefore, she was not entitled
to be  paid the salary of District Education officer. We are
unable to  understand  the  reason  given  in  the  counter-
affidavit.  She	  was  promoted	 to  the  post	of  District
Education officer,  a Class-I  post, on an acting basis. Our
attention was  not invited  to any  rule which provides that
promotion on  an acting	 basis would not entitle the officer
promoted to  the pay of the post. In the absence of any rule
justifying such	 refusal to  pay to an officer promoted to a
higher post the salary of such higher post (the
656
validity of such a rule would be doubtful if it existed), we
must hold that Smt. Grover is entitled to be paid the salary
of a  District Education  officer  from	 the  date  she	 was
promoted to  the post,	that is,  July 19,  1976, until	 she
retired from  service on  August 31,  1980.  The  appeal  is
accordingly allowed with costs.
H.L.C.					     Appeal allowed.
657




