

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Rattan Singh Etc. Etc vs State Of Punjab & Ors. Etc. Etc on 22 October, 1981Equivalent citations: 1982 AIR, 1		  1982 SCR  (1)1010
Author: Y Chandrachud
Bench: Chandrachud, Y.V. ((Cj)
           PETITIONER:
RATTAN SINGH ETC. ETC.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF PUNJAB & ORS. ETC. ETC.

DATE OF JUDGMENT22/10/1981

BENCH:
CHANDRACHUD, Y.V. ((CJ)
BENCH:
CHANDRACHUD, Y.V. ((CJ)
VARADARAJAN, A. (J)
SEN, AMARENDRA NATH (J)

CITATION:
 1982 AIR    1		  1982 SCR  (1)1010
 1981 SCC  (4) 481	  1981 SCALE  (3)1625
 CITATOR INFO :
 RF	    1984 SC1095	 (10)
 RF	    1990 SC 231	 (17)
 C	    1991 SC1983	 (6)


ACT:
     Conservation af  Foreign  Exchange	 and  Prevention  of
Smuggling Activities Act 1974-Petitioner's representation to
Central Government submitted through Jail Superintendent not
forwarded-Effect of-Scope  of power  of	 Central  Government
under section 11(1).



HEADNOTE:
     The petitioner,  who was detained under section 3(1) of
the Conservation  of  Foreign  Exchange	 and  Prevention  of
Smuggling Activities  Act,  1974  made	(on  April  19,1981)
through	   the	   Jail	   Superintendent     representation
simultaneously to  the	State  Government  as  well  as	 the
Central Government  against the	 order of  his detention. In
his  petition  under  Article  32  of  the  Constitution  he
contended that	the failure  of, the  Central Government  to
consider his  representation inspite  of the long passage of
time had rendered his detention illegal
     The Jail  Superintendent in  his affidavit	 stated that
the representation  was forwarded  to the  State Government.
The State  Government after  considering his  representation
rejected it.
     Allowing the petitions
^
     HELD: The detention is illegal. [1012 F]
     The petitioner  had been  unaccountably deprived  of  a
valuable right to defend and assert his fundamental right to
personal liberty. Laws of preventive detention afford only a
modicum of  safeguards to  person detained under them and if
freedom	 and   liberty	are  to	 have  any  meaning  in	 our
democratic set	up it  is  essential  that  at	least  those
safeguards are	not denied  to	the  detenu.  If  the  power
conferred on  the Central Government by section 11(1) of the
Act to	revoke an  order of detention even if it was made by
the State  Government or  its officers	is to  be  rial	 and
effective, it  must imply  the right  in a  detenu to make a
representation to  the Central	Government against the order
of detention.  In the  instant case  the failure on the part
either of the Jail Superintendent or the State Government to
forward the  detenu's representation  to the Central Govern-
ment has  deprived him	of the	valuable right.	 to have his
detention revoked by that Government. [1012 C-F]
     Tara Chand	 v. State  of Rajasthan, [1980] 2 S.C.C. 321
and Shyam  Ambalal Siroya  v. Union of India, [1980 2 S.C.C.
346, referred to.
1011



JUDGMENT:
     ORlGlNAL JURlSDlCTlON:  Writ Petition  Nos. 3614 & 3647
of 1981.
     Harjinder Singh for the Petitioner.
     N. S. Das Bahl and M. S. Dhillon for Respondent No. 1.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     CHANDRACHUD, C.J.: By this petition under Article 32 of
the Constitution  the petitioner  challenges the validity of
an order  dated March  27, 1981	 passed by respondent 1, the
State of  Punjab, under	 section 3(1) of the Conservation of
Foreign enchange and Prevention of Smuggling Activities Act,
1974.
     On	 April	 19,  1981,  while  the	 petitioner  was  in
detention, his	advocate,  Shri	 Harjinder  Singh,  wrote  a
letter to  the Superintendent  of  Central  Jail,  Amritsar,
enclosing therewith two representations drafted on behalf of
the petitioner,	 one of	 which was  addressed to D the Joint
Secretary,  Department	 of  Home,   Government	 of  Punjab,
Chandigarh, and	 the other  to the Secretary, Union Ministry
of Finance,  Department of  Revenue, New  'Delhi.  The	Jail
Superintendent was  requested by  the aforesaid	 letter that
the representations be forwarded to the State Government and
the Central Government after obtaining the signatures of the
detenu thereon.	 The contention of the petitioner is that in
spite of the long passage of time, the representation to the
Central Government  has not  so far  been considered  by it,
rendering his detention illegal.
     In his counter-affidavit dated July 29, 1981, the Under
Secretary to  the Government  of India,	 Ministry of Finance
(Department of	Revenue), COFEPOSA Unit, New Delhi says that
"no representation by or on behalf of the detenu relating to
his detention  has been	 received by the Central Government.
As such, the question of any delay in the disposal of such a
representation does  not arise". In his affidavit dated July
21, 1981  the  P.P.S.  (1),  Superintendent,  Central  Jail,
Amritsar says  that the	 representation of the detenu Rattan
Singh was  forwarded to the Punjab Government. The affidavit
of Smt.	 Shyama Mann, Joint Secretary to Government, Punjab,
Home Department, Chandigarh shows that the representation of
the detenu  was considered  by the  Government of Punjab and
was rejected on April 28, 1981.
1012
     There is  no difficulty in so far as the representation
to  the	  Government  of   Punjab  is	concerned.  But	 the
unfortunate lapse  on the  part of  the authorities  is that
they overlooked	 totally  the  representation  made  by	 the
detenu to the Central Government. The representations to the
State Govermnent and the Central Government were made by the
detenu simultaneously  through the  Jail Superintendent. The
Superintendent	 should	  either   have	  for	warded	 the
representations separately  to the  Governments concerned or
else he	 should have  forwarded them to the State Government
with a	request for  the onward	 transmission of  the  other
representation to  the Central	Government. Some one tripped
somewhere and  the representation  addressed to	 the Central
Government was	apparently never  forwarded to	it, with the
inevitable result  that the  detenu has	 been  unaccountably
deprived of  a	valuable  right	 o  defend  and	 assert	 his
fundamental right  to personal	liberty.  May  be  that	 the
detenu is  a smuggler  whose tribe  (and how  their  numbers
increase !)  deserves no  sympathy since its activities have
paralysed the  Indian economy.	But the	 laws of  preventive
detention afford  only a  modicum of  safeguards to  persons
detained under	them and  if freedom and liberty are to have
any meaning  in our  democratic set-up, it is essential that
at least  those safeguards  are not  denied to	the detenus.
Section	 11   (1)  of  COFEPOSA	 confers  upon	the  Central
Government the power to revoke an order of detention even if
it is  made by	the State  Government or  its officer.	That
power, in  order to  be real  and effective,  must imply the
right in  a detenu  to make  a representation to the Central
Government against  the order  of detention.  The failure in
this case  on the  part either of the Jail Superintendent or
the State  Government to forward the detenu's representation
to the	Central Government  has deprived  the detenu  of the
valuable  right	 to  have  his	detention  revoked  by	that
Government. The	 coutinued  detention  of  the	detenu	must
therefore be held illegal and the detenu set free.
 In Tata  Chand v. State of Rajasthan(1), it was held by
this Court  that even an inordinate delay on the part of the
Central Government in consideration of the representation of
a detenu  would be  in violation  of Article  22(5)  of	 the
Constitution,	 thereby     rendering	   the	   detention
unconstitutional  In   Shyam  Anbalal  Siroya  v.  Union  of
India(2) this  Court held  that when  a	 properly  addressed
representation	is   made  by  the  detenu  to	the  Central
Government for
1013
revocation of  the order  of detention,	 a statutory duty is
cast upon  the Central Government under section 11, COFEPOSA
to apply  its mind  and either revoke the order of detention
or dismiss  the petition  and that a petition for revocation
of  an	order  of  detention  should  be  disposed  of	with
reasonable expedition.	Since the  representation  was	left
unattended for	four months,  the continued detention of the
detenu was  held illegal. In our case, the representation to
the Central Government was not forwarded to it at all.
     These then	 are our reasons for the order dated October
1, 198 1 whereby we directed that the detenu be released,
     Writ Petition No. 3647 of 1981. C
     For the  reasons given  above in Writ Petition No. 3614
of 1981,  this Petition must also succeed and the detenu set
at liberty  as directed in our order dated October 1. It was
on July 2, 1981 that the detenu made a representation to the
Central	 Government  through  the  Superintendent  of  Jail,
Amritsar, and  it is  not denied that the representation has
still not  been considered  by that Government. The counter-
affidavit of  the Under Secretary to the Government of India
shows that  the representation	made by	 the detenu  was not
forwarded at  all to  the Central  Government which explains
the statement  in the  affidavit that  no representation was
received by  the Central  Government and  that therefore the
question of delay in consideration of the representation did
not arise.
P.B.R.				   Petitions allowed.
1014




