

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Mst. Karbalai Begum vs Mohd. Sayeed And Ors. on 23 October, 1981Equivalent citations: 1981 (3) SCALE 1640, (1981) 4 SCC 632, 1982 (14) UJ 65 SC
Author: S M Ali
Bench: P Bhagwati, S M Ali
JUDGMENT
  

S. Murtaza Fazal Ali, J.

1. These petitions for review have been filed by Mst. Karbalai Begum who was appellant in civil appeal No. 1204 of 1978 decided by this Court on October 7, 1980. We have heard counsel for the parties and the short point raised by counsel for the applicant is that although the suit for joint possession filed by Karbalai Begum was decreed by this Court after setting aside the judgment of the High Court yet when she applied for execution of the decree, possession was not given to her. According to the findings of fact, it appears that according to our decision, the suit of the plaintiff-applicant was decreed for joint possession in chakbandi plots Nos. 201 and 274 in village Zainabad, Tehsil Nawabganj, District Barabanki (U.P.) According to the admitted genealogy, Karbalai Begum was the widow of Syed Laek Husain who was the son of Khadim Husain and the respondents are the sons of the brothers of Khadim Husain. It is, therefore, clear that Karbalai Begum would, according to Mohammedan Law, get one-fourth share in the two plots.

2. Mr. Anwar Ahmed appearing for the respondents submitted that he would have no objection if partition in respect of the two plots is done by metes and bounds by the Tehsildar as the lands have already been the subject matter of the chalkbandi. The applicant also prayed that due to an obvious omission which amounts to an error on the face of the record, while granting relief for possession, this Court omitted to give the consequential relief of mesne profits when in fact a sum of Rs. 15,000/- had been deposited in the High Court to be paid to the plaintiff on account of payment of mesne profits. The quantum of mesne profits, however, is disputed by the respondents and it is not possible for us to decide this controversy in the petition for review. There can, however, be no doubt that since the plaintiff, Karbalai Begum had succeeded fully and got a decree for joint possession, she will be entitled to mesne profits from the date of the decree as also up to the date when possession is delivered to her. We, therefore, review our judgment and decree passed on October 7, 1980 to the extent that we direct that the plaintiff shall also be entitled to mesne profits as indicated above.

3. We further direct that the case may be sent to the Tehsildar, Barabanki who will deliver possession of one-fourth share to Karbalai Begum which, according to her, comes to 11.1.81 bighas. The Tehsildar will determine the mesne profits on the basis of the net yield of the land during a year after taking such evidence as is offered by the parties. The amount of mesne profits will be paid out of the balance of Rs. 15,000/- deposited before the High Court after deducting the cost taxed by this Court in civil appeal No. 1204/1978 as also the cost of these applications. The balance of the amount, if any, would be set off against the mesne profits ascertained and if there is any excess that will have to be recovered from the defendants. In case, however. the amount of cost taxed by this Court and the amount of mesne profits ascertained according to the order passed by us, fall below the amount of Rs. 15,000/- then only the balance will be refunded to the defendants. In case the amount of Rs. 15,000/- falls short of the required amount, i.e., the cost taxed by this Court plus the mesne profits, the Tehsildar, Barabanki will refer the matter to the trial court for passing a further decree of the amount thus fallen short.

These review petitions are accordingly allowed with costs assessed at Rs. 2,000/-.

