

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Gurdayal Singh Fiji vs The State Of Punjab And Ors on 14 October, 1981Equivalent citations: 1981 AIR 2015, 1982 SCR  (1) 904
Author: A N Sen
Bench: Sen, Amarendra Nath (J)
           PETITIONER:
GURDAYAL SINGH FIJI

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
THE STATE OF PUNJAB AND ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT14/10/1981

BENCH:
SEN, AMARENDRA NATH (J)
BENCH:
SEN, AMARENDRA NATH (J)
CHANDRACHUD, Y.V. ((CJ)
VARADARAJAN, A. (J)

CITATION:
 1981 AIR 2015		  1982 SCR  (1) 904
 1981 SCC  (4) 419	  1981 SCALE  (1)1553
 CITATOR INFO :
 D	    1987 SC 593	 (18)


ACT:
     Constitution of  lndia  1950,  Article  32	 and  Indian
Administrative Service (Appointment by Promotion) Regulation
1955-Member of	State Civil Service Cadre Adverse remarks in
confidential  roll-Certificate	of  integrity  not  granted-
I.A.S. Select List-Claim for inclusion-Whether maintainable.



HEADNOTE:
     The petitioner,  a member of the State Provincial Civil
Service, in  his writ  petition to this Court contended that
he was one of the senior most persons in the service, with a
consistently good record, but because of two adverse remarks
by two officers, certificate of integrity had not been given
to him,	 and that  the adverse remarks made against him were
mala fide  and unjustified  and the  refusal to	 grant him a
certificate of	integrity and  to include  his name  in	 the
l.A.S. Select List was wrongful and illegal.
     Dismissing the writ petition,
^
     HELD :1.  The I.A.S. Selection Committee which prepares
the Select  List is  an	 independent  body,  The  petitioner
cannot claim  to be  included in the Select List as a matter
of right.  The Select  List is	prepared  by  the  Selection
Committee on consideration of the merits on the basis of the
suitability of the officer concerned and the recommendations
made by	 the Selection	Committee have to be approved by the
Union Public Service Commission. [906 C-D]
     In the  instant case  the Selection  Committee has	 not
considered the	petitioner to  be suitable to be included in
the Select  List and the Union Public Service Commission has
agreed	 with	 the   recommendation	of   the   Selection
Committee.The claim  of the  petitioner for inclusion in the
Select List must, therefore, fail. [906 E]
     2. The  petitioner is  now SS  years of age and the age
bar in	the matter  of inclusion in the Select List deprives
the petitioner	from being included in the Select List. [906
F]



JUDGMENT:
     ORlGlNAL JURlSDlCTlON: Writ Petition No. 4533 of 1980.
     (Under article 32 of the Constitution of India)
     Petitioner in person
     Hardayal Hardy and M.S. Dhillon, for Respondent No. 1.
905
     P.A. Francis,  N. Netlar and R.N. Poddar for Respondent
A No. 15.
     Jitendra Sharma and P. Caur for Respondents Nos. 25-31,
33-38, 41-43, 46-48 and 51-55.
     Respondent No. 58 in person.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     AMARENDRA NATH SEN, J. Gurdayal Singh Fiji, a member of
the Punjab Provincial Civil Service, has presented this writ
petition in person and he has argued his own case in person.
     The main  grievance of  the  Petitioner  in  this	writ
petition appears to be against the non-inclusion of his name
in the l.A.S. Select List.
     It is  the case of the petitioner that he is one of the
senior-most persons  in the service with a consistently good
record of  service on  the whole, but because of two adverse
remarks by  two officers,  certificate of  integrity has not
been given  to him.  The Petitioner submits that the adverse
remarks made  against him were mala fide and unjustified and
the refusal  to grant him a certificate of integrity and not
to include  his name  in the  I.A.S. Select List is wrongful
and illegal.
     As this  writ petition  may be  disposed of  on a short
point, it  does not  become necessary  for us  to set out at
length the various facts and circumstances of this case. The
Petitioner has	taken us through the records and the various
documents filed	 in support  of his  case made	in the	writ
petition.
     In view  of the  grievance made by the Petitioner as to
non-inclusion of  his name in the Select List, this Court by
an order(l)  passed  on	 9.3.1979  directed  the  I.  A.  S.
Selection Committee  to hold  a special	 meeting to consider
the question  of inclusion  of the name of the Petitioner in
the Select List. Pursuant to the order passed by this Court,
I.A.S. Selection  Committee held  a special  meeting on	 the
21.7.1979 and  the Selection  Committee found the Petitioner
to be unsuitable for inclusion in the Select List. It may be
noted that the I.A.S. Selection Committee which prepares the
Select List  is an  independent body  and recommendations of
the
906
I.A.S. Selection Committee further require to be approved by
the Union  Public Service  Commission. The decision taken by
the I  A.S. Selection  Committee  at  the  meeting  held  on
21.7.1979 pursuant  to the  order of  this Court refusing to
include the  Petitioner in  the Select	List was approved by
the Union  Public Service  Commission which  agreed with the
recommendation. An  affidavit has  also been  filed by	Shri
D.C.  Mishra,	Director,  Department	of   Personnel	 and
Administrative Reforms, Ministry of Home Affairs, New Delhi.
The averments  made in	this affidavit	go to establish that
the case  of the Petitioner for inclusion in the Select List
was properly considered by the Selection Committee on merits
As we  have earlier  noticed, the  Selection Committee is an
independent body  and there is nothing on record to pursuade
us to  hold that the decision of the Selection Committee was
not properly  arrived at  on consideration  of the merits of
the case  and was,  in any  way,  otherwise  motivated.	 The
Petitioner cannot claim to be included in the Select List as
a matter  of right.  The Select	 List  is  prepared  by	 the
Selection Committee  on consideration  of the  merits on the
basis  of   suitability	 of   the  officer   concerned	 and
recommendations made  by the  Selection Committee have to be
approved by the Union Public service Commission.
     As the  Selection	Committee  has	not  considered	 the
Petitioner to  be suitable to be included in Select List and
the Union  Public Service  Commission has  agreed  with	 the
recommendation of  the Selection Committee, the claim of the
Petitioner for inclusion in the select List must fail.
     There is  another aspect  of the  matter which  goes to
establish that	the case  of the Petitioner for inclusion in
the Select  List cannot now be considered. The Petitioner is
now SS	years of  age and  the age  bar	 in  the  matter  of
inclusion in  the Select  List debars  the  Petitioner	from
being included	in the	Select	List.  In  the	result	this
petition fails	and is,	 therefore, dismissed.	There  will,
however, be no order as to costs.
N.V.K.				  Petition dismissed.
907




