

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Ashok Kumar Binny And Hansraj vs State Of Jammu & Kashmir & Others on 10 December, 1981Equivalent citations: 1982 AIR  978, 1982 SCR  (2) 142
Author: R Pathak
Bench: Pathak, R.S.
           PETITIONER:
ASHOK KUMAR BINNY AND HANSRAJ

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF JAMMU & KASHMIR & OTHERS

DATE OF JUDGMENT10/12/1981

BENCH:
PATHAK, R.S.
BENCH:
PATHAK, R.S.
VENKATARAMIAH, E.S. (J)

CITATION:
 1982 AIR  978		  1982 SCR  (2) 142
 1982 SCC  (1) 174	  1981 SCALE  (3)1890


ACT:
     Jammu and	Kashmir Public Safety Act 1978 Section 16(1)
scope of.



HEADNOTE:
     The petitioners were detained under the Jammu & Kashmir
Public Safety  Act 1978.  Their cases  were referred  to the
Advisory Board,	 which did  not submit its report yet to the
Government, although  eight weeks from the date of detention
had  already  expired.	It  was	 argued	 that  there  was  a
violation of  sub section  (1) of  Section 16  of the Public
Safety	Act   and  therefore,	further	 detention   of	 the
Petitioners was invalid.
     Accepting the petitions it was,
^
     HELD: (1)	The petitioners	 enjoy a  fundamental  right
under Article  21 of  the Constitution not to be deprived of
their  personal	  liberty,  except  according  to  procedure
established by	law. In	 cases where a Government resorts to
preventive detention,  Clauses (4)  to	(7)  of	 Article  22
prescribe the conditions relating to preventive detention. A
perusal of  these Clauses  will make it immediately apparent
that  the  constitution	 places	 the  greatest	emphasis  on
severely limiting  the period  of preventive  detention	 and
envisages time	bound stages for the processing of a case as
it reaches  its determination.	The Jammu  & Kashmir  Public
Safety Act  contains provisions which specify the successive
stages and also prescribe the period within which each stage
must be completed [143 H, 144 A-B]
     2. It  is clear that the period prescribed by sub-s (1)
of s.  16 of the Act for the submission of its report by the
Advisory Board	has already  expired. Sub-s.  (1) of  s.  16
provides that  the Advisory  Board,  after  considering	 the
material before	 it and such further material as it may deem
necessary and  after hearing  the person  concerned, shall .
submit its  report to the Government within eight weeks from
the  date  of  detention.'  The	 obligation  placed  on	 the
Advisory Board	to submit  its report  within the prescribed
period must be construed strictly in as much as the personal
liberty of  a person  is involved  and having  regard to the
emphasis  which	 the  Constitution  has	 placed,  and  which
emphasis is  reflected in  the	Act,  on  the  necessity  of
expeditiously  determining  whether  the  detention  of	 the
person concerned should be continued. [144 B-F]
143
      Shri  Mritunjoy Pramanik	v. The State of West Bengal,
[1972] 2 S.C.C. 586, referred to.



JUDGMENT:
     ORIGINAL JURISDICTION:  Writ Petition  (Criminal)	Nos.
8333 and 8365 of 1981.
     (Under article 32 of the Constitution of India)
     Bhim Singh and P.D. Sharma for the Petitioners.
     Altaf Ahmad for the Respondent.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     PATHAK, J.	 The petitioners  Ashok Kumar Binny and Hans
Raj have  been detained	 by  the  Government  of  Jammu	 and
Kashmir under s. 8 of the Jammu & Kashmir Public Safety Act,
1978. They  have filed	these petitions	 for a	writ in	 the
nature of habeas corpus directing their release.
     The petitioner  Hans Raj  was detained  on 17th August,
1981 while  the petitioner Ashok Kumar Binny was detained on
1st October,  1981. It	is pointed  out that  although their
cases have been referred to the Advisory Board, the Advisory
Board has  not submitted  its report  yet to the Government,
and as	eight weeks  from the date of detention have expired
there has  been a  violation of	 sub-s. (1)  of s. 16 of the
Public Safety  Act. In	the circumstances,  it is urged, the
further detention  of the petitioners is invalid. When these
petitions were	called on  for	hearing,  Mr.  Altaf  Ahmed,
appearing for  the respondents,	 placed before us a wireless
communication received	by him	from  the  State  Government
stating the  Advisory Board  was programmed to sit today and
instructing him	 to seek  adjournment in these cases. We are
unable to  grant the adjournment because it seems to us that
any proceeding	now taken by the Advisory Board can be of no
consequence in	supporting  the	 further  detention  of	 the
petitioners.
     The petitioners enjoy a fundamental right under Article
21 not	to be  deprived of  their  personal  liberty  except
according to
144
procedure established  by law. In cases where the Government
resorts to  preventive detention,  clauses  (4)	 to  (7)  of
Article 22  prescribe the  conditions relating to preventive
detention.  A	perusal	 of   these  clauses  will  make  it
immediately  apparent	that  the  Constitution	 places	 the
greatest  emphasis   on	 severely  limiting  the  period  of
preventive detention and envisages time-bound stages for the
processing of  a case  as it  reaches its determination. The
Jammu and  Kashmir Public  Safety  Act	contains  provisions
which specify  the successive  stages and also prescribe the
period within which each stage must be completed. Section 15
declares that  after a	detention order	 has been  made	 the
Government must,  within four  weeks from  the date  of	 the
detention  order,  place  before,  the	Advisory  Board	 the
grounds on which the order has been made, the representation
made by	 the person  effected by  the order,  and where	 the
order has  been made  by an officer, also the report by such
officer. Thereafter,  sub-s. (1)  of s. 16 provides that the
Advisory Board, after considering the material before it and
such further  material as  it may  deem necessary  and after
hearing the  person concerned,	shall "submit  its report to
the  Government	  within  eight	  weeks	 from  the  date  of
detention". The	 obligation placed  on the Advisory Board to
submit its  report within  the	prescribed  period  must  be
construed strictly  inasmuch as	 the personal  liberty of  a
person is  involved and	 having regard to the emphasis which
the Constitution has placed, and which emphasis is reflected
in the	Act, on	 the necessity	of expeditiously determining
whether the  detention of  the person  concerned  should  be
continued.
     In the  cases before  us, it  is clear  that the period
prescribed by  sub-s. (1)  of s.  16  of  the  Act  for	 the
submission of  its report  by the Advisory Board has already
expired. On  that ground  alone, it  must be  held that	 the
further detention  of the two petitioners is invalid. We are
supported in  this view	 by Shri  Mritunjoy Pramanik  v. The
State of West Bengal.
     We allow  these writ  petitions and direct the State of
Jammu and  Kashmir and	other  respondents  to	release	 the
petitioners
145
Ashok Kumar  Binny and	Hans Raj  forthwith. Immediately  on
their release,	the Chief  Secretary,  State  of  Jammu	 and
Kashmir, will  intimate to this Court that their release has
been effected.
N.K.A.					  Petitions allowed.
146




