

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Dr. C. Girijambal vs Govt. Of Andhra Pradesh on 11 February, 1981Equivalent citations: 1981 AIR 1537, 1981 SCR  (2) 782
Author: V Tulzapurkar
Bench: Tulzapurkar, V.D.
           PETITIONER:
DR. C. GIRIJAMBAL

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
GOVT. OF ANDHRA PRADESH

DATE OF JUDGMENT11/02/1981

BENCH:
TULZAPURKAR, V.D.
BENCH:
TULZAPURKAR, V.D.
CHANDRACHUD, Y.V. ((CJ)

CITATION:
 1981 AIR 1537		  1981 SCR  (2) 782
 1981 SCC  (2) 155	  1981 SCALE  (1)281
 CITATOR INFO :
 APR	    1989 SC1247	 (9)


ACT:
     Constitution of India 1950, Article 16-Medical Officers
of  Dispensaries-   Three  categories-G.C.I.M.,	 L.I.M.	 and
D.A.M. degree holders-Different pay scale for each category-
Whether valid.
     Professional services-Principle  of equal pay for equal
work-Whether can be invoked.



HEADNOTE:
     The appellant  was selected  for the  post	 of  Medical
Officer in the Local Fund, Ayurvedic Dispensary in the Zilla
Parishad. She  possessed a  Diploma  in	 Ayurvedic  Medicine
(D.A.M.). Her  salary was fixed in the scale of Rs. 125-220.
Her representation  to fix  her pay  in the higher scale had
been rejected  by the  State Government	 on the	 ground that
only candidates	 with `A'  class Registration could be given
the higher scale of pay.
     Under the	Andhra	Ayurvedic  and	Homeopathic  Medical
Practitioners Registration  Act, 1956  holders of Diploma in
Ayurvedic Medicine  (D.A.M.), holders  of  Graduate  of	 the
College of  Integrated Medicine	 (G.C.I.M.) and	 holders  of
Licentiate in  Indigenous Medicine (L.I.M.) were entitled to
class `A'  Registration Certificate.  Her application to the
Andhra Board  of Ayurveda  for	registration  as  `A'  class
Practitioner was rejected.
     Allowing her  petition, impugning	the  action  of	 the
Board of  Ayurveda, the	 High Court held that being a person
possessing a  diploma similar  to the G.C.I.M. or L.I.M. she
was entitled  to be  registered in  class `A'  and that	 she
should be  given all the benefits of the higher pay scale of
Rs. 180-320.
     The scale	of pay	of Rs.	180-320 for Medical Officers
holding L.I.M.	was revised  to Rs.  200-400. Sometime later
the scales  of pay were again revised. The scale of Rs. 200-
400 was	 split into  two categories:  (i) Rs.  530-1050	 for
Medical Officers  holding L.I.M.  and (ii)  Rs. 430-800	 for
other Medical  Officers. In the first revision she was given
the scale  of Rs.  200-400 but under the second revision she
was given only the scale of Rs. 430-800.
     Her representation to the Government for fixing her pay
in the	scale of  Rs. 530-1050 having not been answered, she
moved the  Andhra Pradesh Administrative Tribunal which held
that she  was not  entitled to a higher scale as she did not
possess	 the   requisite  qualifications  mentioned  in	 the
relevant government order.
     Before this  Court it  was contended  on behalf  of the
appellant that:	 (1) Medical Officers holding the degrees of
G.C.I.M. or  D.A.M. perform the same functions and discharge
the same duties in dispensaries and that on the principle of
equal pay  for equal work, the appellant should be given the
pay scale meant
783
for  Medical  Officers	holding	 G.C.I.M.  because  she	 was
entitled to class `A' Registration Certificate and (2) since
she had	 been fixed  in the  scale of  Rs. 200-400 under the
first revision	she should  have been fixed under the second
revision in  the scale	of Rs. 530-1050 alongwith holders of
L.I.M.
     Dismissing the appeal,
^
     HELD :  1. The  contention that because her diploma was
regarded  as   similar	or   equivalent	 to   G.C.I.M.	 for
registration purposes  she should  be given  the  pay  scale
available to  the holder of G.C.I.M. was rightly rejected by
the tribunal. [787 E]
     2. The  principle of equal pay for equal work cannot be
invoked invariably  in every  kind of  service. It cannot be
invoked in the area of professional services. [786 F]
     In the  instant case by reason of the fact that Medical
Officers holding the qualifications of G.C.I.M. or L.I.M. or
D.A.M. were  placed incharge of Zilla Parishad dispensaries,
they cannot  be treated on par with each other. If the State
Government  or	the  Zilla  Parishads  prescribes  different
scales of pay for each category of Medical Officers no fault
could be found with such prescription. [786 H-787 A]
     3. The  similarity or  equality conferred on holders of
G.C.I.M.,  L.I.M.   and	 D.A.M.	 was  for  the	purposes  of
registration as	 practitioners of  modern medicine under the
Registration  Act,   1956,  and	  not  in   the	 matter	  of
proficiency. The  High Court in its order made it clear that
for the	 purposes of registration under the Registration Act
the appellant  as a holder of D.A.M. was similar to G.C.I.M.
and was entitled to class `A' Registration Certificate. That
these three  categories were  not equated  in the  matter of
proficiency is	borne out  from the fact that right from the
beginning the  pay scales  prescribed for  these  categories
were different, highest pay scale being available to holders
of G.C.I.M.  the next  lower being  available to  holders of
L.I.M. and  the lowest	to medical  practitioners other than
these two categories. [787 C-D]
     4.	 When	the  first   revision  was  undertaken,	 the
appellant was  put in  the pay scale of Rs. 200-400, the one
which was  also given  to Medical  Officers  holding  L.I.M.
because under  the order of the High Court the appellant had
been fixed  initially in  the scale  of Rs. 180-320 and when
that pay  scale was  revised to Rs. 200-400 she was required
to be given that revised scale. When the second revision was
undertaken it  was open to the State Government to split the
scale into  two categories  : one meant for Medical Officers
holding L.I.M. and the other for Medical Officers other than
L.I.M. Since  the appellant  was not  a holder of L.I.M. but
fell in	 the other  category she  was properly	fixed in the
lower revised pay scale of Rs. 430-800. [787 G-788 A]



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION : Civil Appeal No. 1173 of
1979.
     Appeal by	Special Leave  from the	 Judgment and  Order
dated  18-8-1977   of  the   Andhra  Pradesh  Administrative
Tribunal, Hyderabad in Representation Petition No. 286/77.
     M. K. Ramamurthi, Miss R. Vaigai and J. Rama Murthi for
the Appellant.
784
     G. N. Rao for the Respondent.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     TULZAPURKAR, J.-This appeal by special leave raises the
question about	the eligibility of the appellant to a higher
pay scale  under G.O.M.	 No. 574 P.R. dated October 20, 1975
with effect from November 1, 1974.
     The facts	giving rise  to the question may be stated :
the appellant  passed Diploma  in Ayurvedic  Medicine  (DAM)
from Kerala University in the year 1962, having studied this
course for  four years and nine months with one more year of
House Surgeoncy.  Besides  Ayurvedic  Medicine	this  course
consisted of  Modern Medicine  also. This  Diploma  is	also
included in  the Second	 Schedule  to  the  Indian  Medicine
Central Council	 Act, 1970.  According to  the appellant the
Government of  Kerala had  treated the	holders of D.A.M. on
par with  holders of  G.C.I.M. (Graduate  of the  College of
Integrated Medicine)  and L.I.M.  (Licentiate in  Indigenous
Medicine) in regard to registration of medical practitioners
in modern  medicine, and all the three were also entitled to
Class  `A'   Registration  Certificate	 under	the   Andhra
Ayurvedic and Homeopathic Medical Practitioners Registration
Act, 1956 (hereinafter called `the Registration Act').
     In response to the advertisement published by the Zilla
Parishad, Nellore  the appellant  applied for appointment to
the  post   of	Medical	  Officer,  Local   Fund   Ayurvedic
Dispensary, Duggarajapatnam,  Nellore District	and after an
interview on  being selected  she joined  the duties  of the
post on	 December 26,  1963. It	 appears that her salary was
fixed in  the pay  scale of  Rs. 125-220,  though  the	post
carried a  higher salary  according to the advertisement [in
fact the  advertisement mentioned  two pay  scales  for	 the
post-(i)   Rs.	  220-425   for	  candidates   holding	 the
qualification of  G.C.I.M. with House Surgeoncy and (ii) Rs.
180-320 for  candidates holding the qualification of L.I.M.]
The  appellant,	  therefore,  made  representations  to	 the
concerned authorities  saying that  she was  entitled  to  a
higher pay scale but the authorities refused to give her the
higher pay scale on the ground that only candidates with `A'
Class Registration  could be  given the scale of Rs. 180-320
and the	 pay scale of Rs. 125-220 was for candidates holding
qualifications	other	than  `A'  Class  Registration.	 The
appellant,  therefore,	 applied  to  the  Andhra  Board  of
Ayurveda on  payment of	 requisite fees	 to register here as
`A' Class  Practitioner and  on their  refusal to  do so she
filed writ  petition No.  3507 of 1969 in the Andhra Pradesh
High Court. On a
785
consideration of  the provisions of the Registration Act the
High Court  held that  the  appellant  being  a	 person	 who
possessed a  Diploma  similar  to  G.C.I.M.  or	 L.I.M.	 was
entitled to  be registered  in Class  `A' and the High Court
further directed  the Zilla  Parishad that  the appellant be
given the  higher pay-scale of Rs. 180-320. The High Court's
directions were	 carried out and the appellant was given all
the benefits  of  the  higher  scale  of  Rs.  180-320	with
retrospective effect from the date of her appointment.
     It appears	 that the  pay scales of Medical Officers in
Zilla Parishad	and Panchayat  Samitis were  revised  twice,
once with  effect from	March 19,  1969 under G.O.M. No. 708
dated December	11, 1970  and second  time with	 effect from
November 1, 1974 under G.O.M. No. 574 P.R. dated October 20,
1975. As  per G.O.M.  No. 708 the then existing scale of Rs.
220-425 (for M.Os. holding G.C.I.M.) was revised to Rs. 250-
500 and	 the then  existing scale  of Rs. 180-320 (for M.Os.
holding L.I.M.) was revised to Rs. 200-400. Under G.O.M. No.
574 the then existing scale of Rs. 250-500 was again revised
to Rs. 530-1050 and the existing scale of Rs. 200 to 400 was
again revised  by splitting the revision into two categories
(i) Rs.	 530 to	 1050 for  M.Os. holding L.I.M. and (ii) Rs.
430-800 for other Medical Officers. Under the first revision
the appellant  was given  the scale  of Rs. 200-400 and when
the second  revision was  undertaken she  was fixed  in	 the
revised pay  scale of  Rs. 430-800 with effect from November
1, 1974.  She represented  to the Government that she should
be given  the scale  of Rs.  530-1050 as  was done for M.Os.
holding either	G.C.I.M. or  L.I.M. but	 she did not receive
any reply  from the Government whereupon the appellant filed
a Representation  Petition No. 286 of 1977 before the Andhra
Pradesh	 Administrative	  Tribunal  seeking  the  relief  of
revised pay scales contending that since in the earlier writ
petition No.  3507 of  1969 the High Court had accepted that
her qualifications  were similar or equivalent to holders of
G.C.I.M. which	entitled her  to Class `A' Registration, she
was entitled  to the scale of pay meant for Medical Officers
holding G.C.I.M.  from the  date of  her appointment and the
benefits of  all the  revisions in that scale. Alternatively
she contended  that in	any event  at the time of the second
revision she should have been treated on par with holders of
L.I.M. and not lower and should have been fixed in the scale
of Rs.	530-1050 and  not Rs. 430-800. The Tribunal rejected
the Representation  Petition holding  that the appellant was
not entitled  to higher	 scale as  she did  not possess	 the
requisite qualifications mentioned in the
786
G.O.M. 574  dated October  20, 1975, and hence the appeal to
this Court.
     Counsel for the appellant reiterated before us the same
two contentions which were urged before the Tribunal. In the
first place  counsel pointed  out that	in the	earlier writ
proceedings the	 High Court  had accepted  the position that
the appellant's	 qualifications were  similar to the holders
of G.C.I.M.  and like  the latter  she was entitled to Class
`A' Registration and he, therefore, urged that the appellant
was entitled  to the  pay scale	 meant for  Medical Officers
holding G.C.I.M.  right from  the date	of her	appointment,
namely, December  26, 1963,  and the  benefits	of  all	 the
revisions of  that scale.  In  support	of  this  contention
counsel sought	to invoke  the principle  of equal  pay	 for
equal work  as, according  to him,  Medical Officers holding
either G.C.I.M.	 or D.A.M.  perform the	 same functions	 and
discharge the  same duties  in	dispensaries  run  by  Zilla
Parishads  and	 Panchayat   Samitis.	Secondly,   in	 the
alternative  counsel   contended  that	 in  any  event	 the
appellant could	 not be	 regarded as  holder  of  any  lower
qualification than a Medical Officer holding L.I.M. inasmuch
as under  the first revision effected by G.O.M. No. 708 both
had been  fixed in the revised pay scale of Rs. 200-400 and,
therefore, when	 the  second  revision	was  effected  under
G.O.M. No.  574 the  appellant should have been fixed in the
revised scale  of Rs.  530-1050 alongwith  holders of L.I.M.
and there  was no  justification  for  giving  her  a  lower
revised scale of Rs. 430-800. For the reasons which we shall
presently indicate  it is  not possible	 to accept either of
these contentions.
     Dealing with  the first  contention we  would  like  to
observe at  the outset	that the  principle of equal pay for
equal work  cannot be invoked or applied invariably in every
kind of	 service and  certainly it  cannot be invoked in the
area  of   professional	 services   when  these	 are  to  be
compensated. Dressing of any injury or wound is done both by
a doctor  as well  as a	 compounder, but surely it cannot be
suggested that	for  doing  this  job  a  doctor  cannot  be
compensated more  than the  compounder. Similarly, a case in
Court of law is argued both by a senior and a junior lawyer,
but it is difficult to accept that in matter of remuneration
both should be treated equally. It is thus clear that in the
field of  rendering professional  services at  any rate	 the
principle of equal pay for equal work would be inapplicable.
In  the	  instant  case	  Medical   Officers   holding	 the
qualification of G.C.I.M., or the qualification of L.I.M. or
the  qualification   of	 D.A.M.,   though   in	 charge	  of
dispensaries run  by Zilla  Parishads, cannot, therefore, be
treated on par with each other and if the State
787
Government or the Zilla Parishads prescribe different scales
of pay	for each category of Medical Officers no fault could
be  found  with	 such  prescription.  The  gravamen  of	 the
appellant's contention	has been that in earlier proceedings
the High  Court had  accepted the  position that a holder of
D.A.M. (like  the appellant)  was similar  to the  holder of
G.C.I.M. and  as such the appellant alongwith the holders of
G.C.I.M. was  entitled to Class `A' Registration Certificate
and, therefore,	 in the	 matter of  remuneration she  should
have been  treated in  the same	 manner	 as  the  holder  of
G.C.I.M. all throughout her service. However, it needs to be
clarified that	the  similarity	 or  equality  conferred  on
holders of  G.C.I.M., L.I.M.  and D.A.M. was for the purpose
of their  registration as  practitioner of  modern  medicine
under the  Registration Act, 1956, all being put under Class
`A' Registration  and not  in the matter of proficiency. The
High Court  in its order had also made it clear that for the
purposes of  registration under	 the  Registration  Act	 the
appellant as  a holder of D.A.M. was similar to G.C.I.M. and
was entitled  to Class	`A' Registration  Certificate.	That
these three  categories were  not equated  in the  matter of
proficiency will  be amply  borne out by the fact that right
from the  beginning the	 pay  scales  prescribed  for  these
categories were different, highest pay scale being available
to holders  of G.C.I.M.	 the next  lower being	available to
holders of  L.I.M. and	the lowest  to Medical Practitioners
other  than  G.C.I.M.  and  L.I.M.  The	 contention  of	 the
appellant, therefore,  that because her Diploma was regarded
as  similar  or	 equivalent  to	 G.C.I.M.  for	registration
purposes  she  should  be  given  the  pay  scale  that	 was
available to  the holder  of G.C.I.M.  cannot  obviously  be
accepted and  in our  view, it	was rightly  rejected by the
Tribunal.
     The  alternative	contention  also  is  liable  to  be
rejected on  the same  basis.  It  is  true  that  when	 the
revision under	G.O.M. No.  708 was undertaken the appellant
was put	 in the	 pay scale of Rs. 200-400 which was also the
pay scale prescribed for Medical Officers holding L.I.M. but
that was  because under	 the earlier order of the High Court
the appellant  had been	 fixed initially in the pay scale of
Rs. 180-320-the	 pay scale  also meant	for Medical Officers
holding L.I.M.	and when  that pay  scale of Rs. 180-320 was
revised to  Rs. 200-400	 she was  required to  be given that
revised scale.	When the  second revision  was undertaken as
per G.O.M.  No. 574  it was  perfectly	open  to  the  State
Government to  split the  revision into	 two categories, one
meant for  Medical Officers holding L.I.M. and the other for
Medical Officers  other than  L.I.M. as has been done in the
instant case  and since	 the appellant	was not	 a holder of
L.I.M. but fell in the other
788
category she  was, in  our view, properly fixed in the lower
revised pay scale of Rs. 430-800.
     As	 no   other  contention	 was  urged  the  appeal  is
dismissed, but we make no order as to costs.
N.V.K.					  Appeal dismissed.
789




