

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Rafiq & Anr vs Munshilal & Anr on 16 April, 1981Equivalent citations: 1981 AIR 1400, 1981 SCR  (3) 509
Author: D Desai
Bench: Desai, D.A.
           PETITIONER:
RAFIQ & ANR.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
MUNSHILAL & ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT16/04/1981

BENCH:
DESAI, D.A.
BENCH:
DESAI, D.A.
ISLAM, BAHARUL (J)

CITATION:
 1981 AIR 1400		  1981 SCR  (3) 509
 1981 SCC  (2) 788
 CITATOR INFO :
 R	    1984 SC  41	 (4)


ACT:
     Procedure-Litigant entrusted  appeal  to  an  advocate-
Advocate  failed   to  appear  in  Court  at  hearing-Appeal
dismissed-Litigant, whether  entitled  to  have	 the  appeal
restored for hearing.
     Costs-Appeal  dismissed   on  account   of	 absence  of
advocate  at  hearing-Costs,  if  could	 be  recovered	from
Advocate.



HEADNOTE:
     On knowing that the High Court had dismissed his appeal
on the ground that his Advocate was not present in the Court
when the matter was taken up for hearing the appellant moved
an application	for the	 recall of  the order dismissing the
appeal and  for permission  to participate in the hearing of
the appeal. The High Court rejected this application stating
that no	 satisfactory explanation  had been furnished by the
Advocate for  his slackness  in	 filing	 the  affidavit	 for
nearly 15 days after it was drafted.
     On the  question whether  the litigant  is entitled  to
have his case reheard by the High Court.
^
     HELD: It is not proper that an innocent litigant, after
doing everything  in his power to effectively participate in
his proceedings	 by entrusting	his case  to  the  Advocate,
should be  made	 to  suffer  for  the  inaction,  deliberate
omission or  misdemeanour of  his agent. For whatever reason
the Advocate might have absented himself from the Court, the
innocent litigant  could not  be allowed to suffer injustice
for the fault of his Advocate. [511 B]
     The respondent's  costs should  be recovered  from	 the
Advocate who absented himself from Court. [511 D]
     [The Court	 directed the  appeal to  be restored to its
     original position in the High Court and heard.]



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 1415 of
1981.
     Appeal by	special leave  from the	 judgment and  order
dated the  7th January	1981 of	 the Allahabad High Court in
Civil Misc. Application No. 113 of 1981 in Second Appeal No.
1484 of 1973.
     O.P. Rana, M. Qamaruddin and Mrs. M. Qamaruddin for the
Appellants.
510
     A.K. Sanghi for Respondent No. 1.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     DESAI, J. Special leave granted.
     We have  heard Mr.	 O. P. Rana, learned counsel for the
appellant, and	Mr. A.K.  Sanghi, learned  counsel  for	 the
respondent. The	 High Court disposed of the appeal preferred
by the	present appellant  in the  absence  of	the  learned
counsel for  the appellant.  When the appellant became aware
of the	fact that  his appeal  had been	 disposed of  in the
absence of his advocate, he moved an application in the High
Court to  recall the  order dismissing his appeal and permit
him to	participate in	the  hearing  of  the  appeal.	This
application was	 rejected by  the High	Court on  the ground
that though  the application was prepared and drafted and an
affidavit was  sworn on 29th October, 1980, the same was not
presented to the court till November 12, 1980 and that there
is no  satisfactory explanation	 for this  slackness on	 the
part of	 the learned  advocate who was requested to file the
application.
     The disturbing  feature of	 the case  is that under our
present adversary  legal system	 where the parties generally
appear	through	 their	advocates,  the	 obligation  of	 the
parties is  to select  his advocate, brief him, pay the fees
demanded by  him and  then trust  the learned advocate to do
the rest  of the  things. The party may be a villager or may
belong to  a rural  area and  may have	no knowledge  of the
court's procedure.  After engaging  a lawyer,  the party may
remain supremely  confident that  the lawyer will look after
his interest.  At the time of the hearing of the appeal, the
personal appearance  of the  party is  not only not required
but  hardly   useful.  Therefore,   the	 party	having	done
everything in  his power  to effectively  participate in the
proceedings can	 rest assured  that he	has neither to go to
the High  Court to  inquire as	to what	 is happening in the
High Court  with regard	 to his appeal nor is he to act as a
watchdog of  the advocate  that the  latter appears  in	 the
matter when it is listed. It is no part of his job. Mr. A.K.
Sanghi stated that a practice has grown up in the High Court
of Allahabad  amongst the  lawyers that	 they remain  absent
when they do not like a particular Bench. Maybe he is better
informed on  this matter.  Ignorance in	 this behalf  is our
bliss. Even  if we  do not put our seal of imprimatur on the
alleged	 practice   by	dismissing  this  matter  which	 may
discourage such	 a tendency,  would  it	 not  bring  justice
delivery system	 into disrepute.  What is  the fault  of the
party who having done everything in his
511
power and  expected of	him  would  suffer  because  of	 the
default of  his advocate.  If we  reject this appeal, as Mr.
A.K. Sanghi  invited us to do, the only one who would suffer
would not  be the  lawyer who  did not	appear but the party
whose interest	he represented. The problem that agitates us
is whether it is proper that the party should suffer for the
inaction, deliberate omission, or misdemeanour of his agent.
The answer  obviously is  in the  negative. Maybe  that	 the
learned	  advocate    absented	 himself   deliberately	  or
intentionally. We  have no  material for  ascertaining	that
aspect of  the matter. We say nothing more on that aspect of
the matter.  However, we  cannot be  a party  to an innocent
party suffering injustice merely because his chosen advocate
defaulted. Therefore,  we allow	 this appeal,  set aside the
order of  the High  Court both	dismissing  the	 appeal	 and
refusing to  recall that order. We direct that the appeal be
restored to  its original  number in  the High	Court and be
disposed of  according	to  law.  If  there  is	 a  stay  of
dispossession it  will continue	 till the  disposal  of	 the
matter by  the High  Court. There remains the question as to
who shall  pay the  costs of the respondent here. As we feel
that the  party is  not	 responsible  because  he  has	done
whatever was  possible and was in his power to do, the costs
amounting to  Rs.200/- should be recovered from the advocate
who absented  himself. The  right to  execute that  order is
reserved with the party represented by Mr. A.K.Sanghi.
     Appeal allowed  to the  extent indicated  with costs in
the manner indicated.
P.B.R.					     Appeal allowed.
512




