

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Sone Lal & Ors vs State Of U.P on 3 April, 1981Equivalent citations: 1981 AIR 1379, 1981 SCR  (3) 352
Author: B Islam
Bench: Islam, Baharul (J)
           PETITIONER:
SONE LAL & ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF U.P.

DATE OF JUDGMENT03/04/1981

BENCH:
ISLAM, BAHARUL (J)
BENCH:
ISLAM, BAHARUL (J)
FAZALALI, SYED MURTAZA
VARADARAJAN, A. (J)

CITATION:
 1981 AIR 1379		  1981 SCR  (3) 352
 1981 SCC  (2) 531	  1981 SCALE  (1)604


ACT:
     Indian Penal  Code 1860, Ss. 302, 307, 323 read with S.
149-Enmity between  parties of	the  accused  and  deceased-
Altercation and	 assault-Accused receiving  injuries-Accused
whether aggressors-Whether  entitled  to  right	 of  private
defence.



HEADNOTE:
     The prosecution  alleged that there was a long standing
enmity	between	  the  parties	 of  the  deceased  and	 the
appellants. There  was a vacant plot of land in front of the
flour mill  and residence  of PW.  1. The appellants started
throwing rubbish  on this  piece of  land. PW.1 and his son,
the deceased,  objected to this. On the fateful day at about
noon  there  was  an  altercation  in  connection  with	 the
throwing of  rubbish,  and  at	about  8  p.m.	one  of	 the
appellants armed  with a  lathi went  to the  flour mill and
challenged PW.	1 and  his companions.	At the	call of this
appellant, the	other appellants  who were  armed with	gun,
pistol, lathi  and spear  arrived at the spot. PW. 1 managed
to snatch  the spear from the hands of one of the appellants
and started  giving blows  to the  assailants  in  order  to
defend himself.	 At that  time two  of the  appellants fired
their gun  and pistol  as a result of which the son of PW. 1
received injuries, to which he succumbed while being removed
to the Police Station. The defence of the appellants was one
of alibi  and that  the offence	 had not  taken place on the
land of PW. 1.
     The appellants were tried before the Sessions Judge who
convicted and  sentenced them under Sections 302-307 and 323
read with Section 149 of the Penal Code.
     The High Court dismissed the appeal. It agreed with the
trial  Court   and  found  that	 the  prosecution  case	 was
established by the evidence of the prosecution witnesses and
that the  defence version  of the case had to be rejected on
account of  the inconsistent  pleas made  by the  appellants
before the committing court and the Sessions Court.
     In the  appeal in	this Court,  it was  contended	that
there was no finding by the trial and appellate courts as to
how the	 assault initially  started and	 which party was the
aggressor, that	 the prosecution had not explained as to how
the
353
appellants received  the injuries,  and that  the appellants
had the	 right of  private defence  and, therefore, they had
committed no offence.
     Dismissing the appeal,
^
     HELD:  1.	 The  High   Court  rightly   accepted	 the
prosecution case  as true and held that the defence case was
false. [356 F]
     2. The  findings of  the two courts below indicate that
it was	the appellants	who were the aggressors and that the
occurrence took	 place on  the land  lying in  front of	 the
house of  PW. 1	 who was  in possession thereof and that the
deceased and  PW. 1  had the  right of	private	 defence  of
property and  person and that they exercised that right. The
appellants who	were the  aggressors, even  if they received
injuries from  the victims  of their aggression, cannot have
any right  of private  defence. The  findings are  that	 the
deceased and PW. 1 were unarmed and that P.W. 1 snatched the
weapon from  one of  the assailants  and caused	 injuries to
them. If  the deceased	and the	 other prosecution witnesses
had been  the aggressors,  PW. 1 would not have come without
his licensed gun.
					  [356 H-357A, 356E]



JUDGMENT:
     CRIMINAL APPELLATE	 JURISDICTION: Criminal	 Appeal	 No.
220 of 1974.
     Appeal by	Special Leave  from the	 Judgment and  Order
dated 9th  January, 1974  of the  Allahabad  High  Court  in
Criminal Appeal	 No. 356/77  connected with  Criminal Appeal
No. 723 of 1970.
     R. K.  Garg, S.  S. Bhatnagar,  V. J. Francis and Sunil
Kumar Jain for the Appellants.
     R. K. Bhat for the Respondent.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     BAHARUL ISLAM, J. This appeal by special leave has been
directed against  the  judgment	 and  order  passed  by	 the
Allahabad High	Court dismissing  two appeals  filed by	 the
appellants before  it. The  appellants were  convicted under
Sections 302,  307 and	323 all read with Section 149 of the
Penal Code.  They were	sentenced to  imprisonment for life,
each, under  Section 302/149,  rigorous imprisonment  for  7
years, each, under Section 307/149 and rigorous imprisonment
for six	 months, each,	under Section  323/149 of  the Penal
Code. Appellants  Harish  Chandra  and	Nathu  were  further
convicted under	 Section 148 of the Penal Code and sentenced
to rigorous  imprisonment for two years, each. The sentences
were directed to run concurrently.
     2. The  facts material  for the  purpose of disposal of
this appeal may be stated thus. The prosecution alleges that
there was
354
long standing enmity between the parties of the deceased and
the appellants. Some time prior to the incident a flour mill
was installed  and a  house constructed by P.W. 1, Pahelwan,
in his	plot of	 land. In  front of  the flour	mill and the
residence of  Pahelwan there  was some	vacant land  in	 his
possession. The	 appellants had	 started throwing rubbish on
the land.  Pahelwan  and  his  son,  Ram  Swarup  (deceased)
objected  to  this.  The  appellants  were  annoyed  at	 the
objection of  Pahelwan and  his	 son  Ram  Swarup.  On	31st
December, 1968	at about  noon appellants Harish Chandra and
Ram Sewak  had some  alteration with Pahelwan and Ram Swarup
in connection with throwing of rubbish on the aforesaid land
and as	a  consequence	the  relation  between	the  parties
worsened. In  the evening  at about  8 O'clock on the 1st of
January, 1969, appellant, Ram Sewak, armed with a lathi went
to the	front of  the flour  mill of Pahelwan and started to
hurl abuses  on Pahelwan  and his son Ram Swarup. Appellant,
Ram Sewak,  challenged Pahelwan	 and his  companions to	 see
them that  day. At  that  time,	 it  has  been	alleged,  an
electric light	was burning  in the front of the room of the
flour mill  as usual.  At the  call of	the  appellant,	 Ram
Sewak, the other appellants came variously armed with lathis
and spears and started giving blows to Pahelwan and his son,
Ram Swarup, both of whom, according to the prosecution, were
unarmed. Pahelwan, somehow, managed to snatch the spear from
the hand of the appellant, Ishwari, and started giving blows
to the	assailants in order to defend himself. At that time,
it has	been further  stated, appellants  Harish Chandra and
Nathu fired  their gun and pistol respectively. As a result,
Ram Swarup  was hit  and he  fell down in front of the flour
mill. The  shot of  Nathu hit  P.W. 1  Pahelwan, Lal Ram and
Shri Kishan,  all of whom received injuries. Lekh Raj, P.W.,
then attacked  the appellants with his lathi, as a result of
which some  injuries were caused to the appellants including
Harish Chandra. Thereafter the appellants escaped.
     3. Ram Swarup succumbed to bullet injuries while he was
being removed  to the  police station.	A first	 information
report was  lodged by  P.W. 1, and eventually the appellants
were committed	to the	court of Sessions that convicted and
sentenced as  stated above.  Their appeal was also dismissed
by the High Court as earlier stated.
     4. Learned	 counsel for  the appellants  submitted that
large number  of injuries  had also  been  received  by	 the
appellants and that there was no finding by the courts below
as to how the assault
355
initially  started   and  which	 party	was  the  aggressor,
prosecution has	 not explained	as  to	how  the  appellants
received the injuries. As such, he submitted, the conviction
for the	 offences with	the aid	 of Section 149, Penal Code,
was bad	 in law. In support of his contention he relied on a
decision of this Court reported in AIR 1976 S. C. 2263. This
Court in A.I.R. 1976 S.C. 2263 has held:
     (1)  That the  prosecution has  suppressed the  genesis
	  and the  origin of the occurrence and has thus not
	  presented the true version;
     (2)  that the witnesses who have denied the presence of
	  the injuries	on the	person of  the	accused	 are
	  lying on  most material  point and therefore their
	  evidence is unreliable;
     (3)  that in  case there  is a  defence  version  which
	  explains the injuries on the person of the accused
	  it is	 rendered probable  so as  to throw doubt on
	  the prosecution case.
	       The omission  on the  part of the prosecution
	  to explain  the injuries  on	the  person  of	 the
	  accused assumes  much greater importance where the
	  evidence  consists   of  interested	or  inimical
	  witnesses or	where the  defence gives  a  version
	  which competes  in probability  with that  of	 the
	  prosecution one."
     The submission  of the  learned  counsel  is  that	 the
injuries found	in the	persons of  the appellants  have not
been explained by the prosecution. The injuries are serious.
The  appellants	 had  the  right  of  private  defence,	 and
therefore, they have committed no offence.
     The submission  of the learned counsel is not warranted
by the	findings of  the High Court. The High Court agreeing
with the  trial Court has found that the prosecution case as
alleged	 has   been  established  by  the  evidence  of	 the
prosecution witnesses.	The High  Court as well as the trial
Court has  rejected the defence version of the case, in view
of their  inconsistent pleas before the Committing Court and
the trial  Court. Before  the Committing Magistrate pleas of
appellants, Harish  Chandra and	 Soney Lal,  were alibi. The
defence of  appellants, Ram  Sewak and	Nathu, was  that the
occurr-
356
ence had not taken place on the land of P.W. 1, Pahelwan, as
alleged by  the prosecution,  but it  had taken	 place at  a
different place.  According to	them there  was a quarrel in
respect of  some property between Ram Swarup, (deceased) and
Zorawar, brother-in-law	 of Ram	 Swarup, in  which appellant
Nathu intervened whereupon Pahelwan (P.W. 1), Lala Ram, Shri
Kishan, Triloki,  Ram Swarup Prasad, Munna Jamadar, Lekthraj
and others  attacked the  appellants and  in  that  incident
injuries were  received by  P.W. 1  and	 the  deceased.	 The
defence	 of   appellant,  Ishwari,   before  the  Committing
Magistrate was	that Pahelwan  (P.W.1), Lekh  Raj and others
attacked him,  as a  result of	which he became unconscious.
The defence  of the appellants before the Sessions Judge was
one  of	 the  right  of	 private  defence.  The	 defence  of
appellant Harish  Chander before  the Sessions	Judge was an
alibi. The  defence of the other appellants was that Ishwari
had been  returning from  Ghurwal Chak.	 At that time he was
attacked by  the prosecution witnesses and the deceased. The
incident took  place on	 a land	 between residence and flour
mill of	 P.W.1 and  in that  assault the  appellants had  to
defend themselves.
     5. On  a consideration  of the  evidence on  record the
learned High  Court agreeing  with the	Sessions  Judge	 has
accepted the version of the prosecution and rejected that of
the defence. In coming to that conclusion the High Court has
also taken  notice of  the fact	 that P.W.1.  had a licensed
gun. Had  he  and  Ram	Swarup	and  other  P.W's  been	 the
aggressors, he	(P.W.1) would not have come without the gun.
In view of the "inconsistent pleas" and "in view of the fact
that no	 infirmity worth  the name  has been  shown  in	 the
statement of  eye witnesses  of the  occurrence",  the	High
Court accepted	the prosecution	 case as true and held "that
the defence  case is  false". The  High Court  has also held
that "appellants were the aggressors".
     It is therefore, not correct to suggest as contended by
the learned  counsel for  the appellants  that there were no
findings on record to show as to how the quarrel started and
that the appellants were the aggressors.
     6. From  the findings of learned courts below the facts
that emerge  are (1) that it was the appellants who were the
aggressors; (2)	 that the  occurrence took place on the land
in front  of the  house of  P.W. 1,  Pahelwan,	who  was  in
possession thereof;  (3) that P.W.1 and the deceased had the
right of the private defence of property and person and they
did exercise that right. Aggres-
357
sors, even  if they  receive injuries  from the	 victims  of
their aggression  cannot have  the right of private defence.
The findings  are that	P.W.1 and the deceased were unarmed.
P.W.1 snatched	a weapon  from one  of	the  assailants	 and
caused injuries	 on them.  On the  top	of  it	two  of	 the
appellants brought  fire arms  and fired at the deceased and
the P.	W. 1, as a result of which the deceased expired. The
submissions of	learned counsel	 for the  appellants do	 not
stand scrutiny.
     7. This appeal has no merit and is dismissed.
N.V.K.					    Appeal dismissed
358




