

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
State Of Maharashtra vs Kapur Chand Kesarimal Jain on 30 January, 1981Equivalent citations: 1981 AIR  927, 1981 SCR  (2) 735
Author: A Koshal
Bench: Koshal, A.D.
           PETITIONER:
STATE OF MAHARASHTRA

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
KAPUR CHAND KESARIMAL JAIN

DATE OF JUDGMENT30/01/1981

BENCH:
KOSHAL, A.D.
BENCH:
KOSHAL, A.D.
ERADI, V. BALAKRISHNA (J)
MISRA, R.B. (J)

CITATION:
 1981 AIR  927		  1981 SCR  (2) 735
 1981 SCC  (2) 458


ACT:
     Probation	of   Offenders	Act-Section  4-Criteria	 for
application of section.



HEADNOTE:
     The respondent was convicted for offences under section
135 of	the Customs  Act and  the Defence of India Rules for
smuggling contraband gold into the country and was variously
sentenced. When	 his appeal came to this Court, the case was
remanded to the High Court for a fresh decision.
     On remand	the High  Court accepted  the prayer  of the
respondent that	 he be given the benefit of section 4 of the
Probation  of	Offenders  Act	 on  the  grounds  that	 the
contraband gold	 recovered from	 him had  been	confiscated;
that he	 had been facing criminal litigation for a period of
seven years  which resulted in a lot of monetary expense and
mental agony  on his part; that he was behind the bars for a
period of  five months,	 that no  other case on the criminal
side was  pending against  him and  that he  was  not  in  a
position to pay any fine.
     In appeal	to this	 Court it was contended on behalf of
the State  that in  giving the	benefit of  section 4 of the
Act,  the   High  Court	 did  not  exercise  its  discretion
properly.
     Allowing the appeal,
^
     HELD : Recourse to section 4 was not at all called for,
the time  lag between  the commencement of the trial and the
pronouncement  of  the	impugned  judgment  notwithstanding.
[737F-G]
     One of  the major	criteria in  determining whether the
benefit of  the provisions of section 4 of the Act should be
given to  the offender	or not is the nature of the offence.
The other  relevant factors  are the age of the offender and
the circumstances in which the offence was committed. [737B-
C]
     In the  instant case none of these factors goes to help
the respondent	because he  was not  a immature youth at the
time of the commission of the offences; he was not less than
24 years  of age then. The offences involved possession of a
large quantity	of contraband gold. That he was apparently a
regular smuggler  is evident  from the	fact  that  a  large
quantity of  gold with foreign marking and a number of empty
jackets meant  for storage  of the  gold were  found in	 his
possession. The	 fact that  such offence  had become rampant
and had already endangered the economy of the nation is part
of current  history and a Court cannot look upon the present
state of affairs with equanimity and deal with such offences
leniently. [737C-E]
     There is  nothing	on  the	 record	 to  show  that	 the
respondent was not in a position to pay any fine. [737F]
736



JUDGMENT:
     CRIMINAL APPELLATE	 JURISDICTION :	 Criminal Appeal No.
365 of 1975.
     Appeal by	Special Leave  from the	 Judgment and  Order
dated 26-6-1973	 of the Bombay High Court in Criminal Appeal
No. 504/72.
     V. S. Desai and M. N. Shroff for the Appellant.
     Anil Kumar Gupta for the Respondent.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     KOSHAL, J.-The respondent in this case was convicted by
the Additional	Chief  Presidency  Magistrate,	19th  Court,
Esplanade, Bombay  for an offence under clause (a) read with
clause (i)  of section 135 of the Customs Act, another under
clause (b)  read with  clause (i)  of that section and still
another under  Rule 126(H)  (IA) read with Rule 126-P (ii) &
(iv) of	 the Defence  of India	Rules. He  was sentenced  to
rigorous imprisonment  for two	years  and  a  fine  of	 Rs.
20,000/- and  in default  of payment  of  fine	to  rigorous
imprisonment for  4-1/2 months	on each	 of  the  first	 two
counts, and  to rigorous  imprisonment for  six months and a
fine of	 Rs. 10,000/-  on the  third count,  the sentence in
default of payment of fine being rigorous imprisonment for 3
months.
     The  conviction   recorded	 against  and  the  sentence
imposed upon  the respondent  were challenged  by him  right
upto this  Court which	remanded the case to the Bombay High
Court for  a fresh  decision.  Before  the  High  Court,  no
challenge was  made after  remand to  the conviction and the
only prayer  made was  that  the  respondent  be  given	 the
benefit of  Section 4  of the  Probation  of  Offenders	 Act
(hereinafter referred  to  as  the  Act).  That	 prayer	 was
accepted by the High Court on the following five grounds :-
     (a) The  contraband gold  recovered from the respondent
(which amounted	 to 2015  tolas) has been confiscated by the
Customs authorities.
     (b) By  the time the High Court pronounced its judgment
after  remand,	the  respondent	 had  been  facing  criminal
litigation for	a period  of 7 years which resulted in a lot
of monetary expense and mental agony on his part.
     (c) The respondent had already been behind the bars for
a period of 5 months.
     (d) No  other case	 on the	 criminal side	was  pending
against the respondent.
     (e) The  respondent was  not in  a position  to pay any
fine.
737
     It has been vehemently argued on behalf of the State by
Mr. Desai that in giving the benefit of Section 4 of the Act
to the	respondent, the	 High Court  did  not  exercise	 its
discretion properly  and we find ourselves in agreement with
him in	spite of the learned arguments advanced by Mr. Gupta
appearing as  amicus  curiae  in  support  of  the  impugned
judgment.
     We may  mention at the very outset that under Section 4
of the	Act, the  nature of  the offence is one of the major
criteria for  determining whether  benefit of its provisions
is to  be given	 to the	 concerned offender  or not. His age
would be another relevant factor. The circumstances in which
the  offence   was  committed	may  be	 a  third  important
consideration. None  of these  factors, as  appearing in the
present case,  goes to	help the  respondent. The respondent
was not	 an immature  youth at the time of the commission of
the 3  offences brought	 home to  him, being no less than 24
years of  age. The  offence committed  by  him,	 as  already
pointed out,  involved possession of no less than 2015 tolas
of contraband  gold and	 it may	 well be that the respondent
was a  regular smuggler,  for had  that not  been the  case,
there is  no  reason  why  he  should  have  been  found  in
possession of  such a  large quantity  of gold	with foreign
markings and  a number of empty jackets meant for storage of
the precious  metal. From  one point of view the offence may
not be	considered heinous  as it  merely contravenes  a law
prohibiting illegal gain simpliciter, there being no element
of detriment to the life and liberty of others, but then the
fact that such offences have become rampant and have already
endangered the	economy of  the nation	is part	 of  current
history and this Court cannot look upon the present state of
affairs with equanimity and deal with the commission of such
offences leniently.  Nor do  we	 find  that  there  was	 any
material whatsoever on the record to justify the observation
by the	High Court that the respondent was not in a position
to pay any fine.
     In this  view of  the matter, we think that recourse to
section 4 of the Act was not at all called, for the time-lag
between the  commencement of the trial and the pronouncement
of the	impugned judgment  notwithstanding. Consequently, we
set aside  that judgment in so far as it concerns the use of
that section  and restore  instead the	conviction  recorded
against and  the sentence imposed upon the respondent by the
trial Court  on each  of the three counts. He shall be taken
into custody forthwith.
     The appeal is disposed of accordingly.
N.K.A.					    Appeal allowed.
738




