

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Smt. Sooraj Devi vs Pyare Lal And Anr on 8 January, 1981Equivalent citations: 1981 AIR  736, 1981 SCR  (2) 485
Author: R Pathak
Bench: Pathak, R.S.
           PETITIONER:
SMT. SOORAJ DEVI

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
PYARE LAL AND ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT08/01/1981

BENCH:
PATHAK, R.S.
BENCH:
PATHAK, R.S.
SARKARIA, RANJIT SINGH

CITATION:
 1981 AIR  736		  1981 SCR  (2) 485
 1981 SCC  (1) 500	  1981 SCALE  (1)46
 CITATOR INFO :
 R	    1990 SC1605	 (6)


ACT:
     Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, S. 362-Scope of.
     Whether the  High Court  can alter	 or review  its	 own
judgment in exercise of inherent powers under s. 482.
     Words and	Phrases-'otherwise provided  by this Code or
by any	other law  for the time being in force'-'Clerical or
arithmetical error'-Meaning of.



HEADNOTE:
     Section 362  of the  Code of  Criminal Procedure, 1973,
mandates a  court not  to alter	 its judgment.	It  declares
that: "save  as otherwise  provided by	this Code  or by any
other law for the time being in force, no Court, when it has
signed its  judgment or	 final order  disposing of  a  case,
shall alter  or review the same except to correct a clerical
or arithmetical error."
     The  house	  property  owned  by  the  husband  of	 the
appellant was  sold in	a court	 auction sale  and the first
respondent purchased  the property  and obtained  possession
through the  Civil  Court  Amin.  In  his  absence,  it	 was
alleged, that  the second  respondent (son of the appellant)
had removed  the lock and entered into possession. The first
respondent, instituted	a criminal  proceeding	against	 the
second respondent,  and	 he  was  ultimately  convicted	 and
sentenced by  the High Court under section 448 of the Indian
Penal Code,  with the  further	direction  that	 'the  house
property  be   restored	 to  the  possession  of  the  first
respondent'. Pursuant  to that	order the  first  respondent
applied for possession, but the appellant objected asserting
her right  to the  property. The  Magistrate  overruled	 the
objection and  observed that it was open to the appellant to
establish her  right by	 way of a civil suit. This order was
upheld by the High Court.
     The appellant thereafter filed a Criminal Miscellaneous
Application before  the High  Court under section 482 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 alleging that she was not a
party  to   the	 criminal   proceedings	 against  the  first
respondent and	that she  was in possession in her own right
and that the earlier order of the High Court in the criminal
proceedings directing restoration of possession to the first
respondent be  clarified by  a declaration  that it  was not
binding on  her and  did not affect her possession. The High
Court dismissed this application.
     Dismissing the appellant's appeal
^
     HELD :  1. The  High Court	 was right  in declining  to
entertain the application. [489 C]
     2. "A  clerical or	 arithmetical  error"  is  an  error
occasioned by  an accidental  slip or omission of the Court.
It represents that which the court never
486
intended to  say. It is an error apparent on the face of the
record and  does not depend for its discovery on argument or
disputation.  An   arithmetical	 error	 is  a	 mistake  of
calculation, and a clerical error is a mistake in writing or
typing. [488 G]
     Master Construction Co. (P) Ltd. v. State of Orissa and
Another, [1966] 3 S.C.R. 99 referred to.
     In the  instant case  what the  appellant sought by the
application,  was  not	the  correction	 of  a	clerical  or
arithmetical error,  but a  declaration that  the High Court
order in  the criminal	proceedings did not affect her right
in the	house property	and that  the direction	 to  restore
possession to  the first  respondent was  confined  to	that
portion only  of the  house property  respecting  which	 the
offence of  trespass was  committed  so	 that  she  was	 not
evicted from the portion in her possession. This controversy
cannot	be  brought  within  the  description  "clerical  or
arithmetical error". [488 D-F]
     3. The inherent power of the Court under section 482 of
the  Code  is  not  contemplated  by  the  saving  provision
contained in  section 362  and, therefore,  the	 attempt  to
invoke that power by the appellant can be of no avail.
						 [488H-489A]
     4. The  inherent power of the Court cannot be exercised
for doing that which is specifically prohibited by the Code.
[489-B]
     Sankatha Singh  v. State  of U.P.	A.I.R. 1962  SC 1208
referred to.
     5. The  prohibition in  section 362  against the  Court
altering or  reviewing its  judgment is	 subject to  what is
"otherwise provided by this Code or by any other law for the
time being  in force."	These  words  refer  only  to  those
provisions where  the Court has been expressly authorised by
the Code or other law to alter or review its judgment. [489-
B]



JUDGMENT:
     CRIMINAL APPELLATE	 JURISDICTION :	 Criminal Appeal No.
471 of 1979.
     From the  Judgment and  Order  dated  5-1-1979  of	 the
Allahabad High Court in Criminal Case No. 5127 of 1978.
     Kameshwar Prasad and Pramod Swarup for the Appellant.
     S. K. Jain for the Respondent.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     PATHAK, J	: This	appeal by  special leave is directed
against an  order of  the Allahabad High Court dismissing an
application for	 "clarification" of an earlier order made by
the court in a criminal proceeding.
     The dispute  in  this  appeal  relates  to	 a  property
described as  house No.	 24/47, Birhana Road, Kanpur. A suit
filed by  the South  India Trading  Company against  Jethmal
Laxmichand was	decreed and execution proceedings were taken
for the attachment and sale of the
487
aforesaid house	 property. The	house was  owned by one Khem
Raj, who  died	leaving	 a  widow,  Smt.  Sooraj  Devi	(the
appellant) and	a son,	Kailash	 Chandra  Jain	(the  second
respondent). The  property was	purchased by  Pyare Lal (the
first respondent). Pyare Lal obtained possession through the
Civil Court  Amin on  8th October,  1965, but in his absence
Kailash Chandra	 Jain is  said to  have removed the lock and
entered into  possession. In  a criminal  proceeding against
him on a complaint by Pyare Lal, he was ultimately convicted
and sentenced  by the  High Court under s. 448, Indian Penal
Code by	 an order  dated Ist September 1970, under which the
High Court  also directed  "that house	No.  24/47,  Birhana
Road,  Kanpur	be  restored   to  the	 possession  of	 the
complainant". Pursuant	to that order, Pyare Lal applied for
possession. The	 appellant filed  an objection,	 asserting a
right  to   the	 property.   The  Magistrate  overruled	 her
objection, observing  that it  was open	 to her to establish
her right by way of suit. The rejection of her objection was
upheld by the High Court by its order dated 21st July, 1978.
The appellant  then filed Criminal Miscellaneous Application
No. 5127  of 1978  before the High Court under s. 482 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure alleging that she was not a party
to the	criminal proceeding  against Kailash  Chandra  Jain,
that she  was in  possession in	 her own right, and that the
earlier order  of the  High Court  dated Ist September, 1970
directing  restoration	 of  possession	  to  Pyare  Lal  be
clarified by  a declaration  that it  was not binding on her
and did not affect her possession. On 5th January, 1979, the
High Court dismissed the application in view of the decision
of this	 Court in  State of  Orissa v.	Ram Chander Agarwala
etc. The order has led to this appeal.
     Before passing  on the  merits of	this appeal,  we may
observe that  the house property has been, and still is, the
subject of  civil litigation.  Civil Suit No. 73 of 1963 was
filed by  Kailash Chandra  Jain and  his minor sons alleging
that they were entitled to the house property and the decree
obtained by  the South India Trading Company was not binding
on them	 and could  not be  executed against  them.  As	 the
property was  meanwhile sold and the sale confirmed the suit
was regarded as infructuous and the plaint was allowed to be
rejected for  want of  court fee. Instead, Civil Suit No. 53
of 1964	 was filed by the minor sons of Kailash Chandra Jain
claiming that  they were  joint owners of the property, that
the sale  conferred no right, title or interest in Pyare Lal
and that they were entitled to an injunction. The appellant,
who had	 originally been  impleaded as	a defendant  in	 the
suit, was  transposed to  the array  of plaintiffs. The suit
was dismissed  in default,  but subsequently restoration was
allowed by the
488
Trial Court on payment of costs, and the time for payment of
costs was  extended by	the High  Court. A third suit, Civil
Suit No.  18  of  1977,	 was  filed  by	 the  appellant	 for
partition.  An	 application  for   interim  injunction	 for
preserving the	appellant's possession in the house property
has been dismissed by the trial court.
     The sole  question before	us is whether the High Court
was right  in refusing	to entertain  Criminal Miscellaneous
Application No.	 5127 of  1978 on  the ground that it had no
power to review its order dated Ist September, 1970. Section
362 of the Code of Criminal Procedure declares :
	  "Save as otherwise provided by this Code or by any
     other law	for the	 time being in force, no Court, when
     it has  signed its judgment or final order disposing of
     a case,  shall alter  or  review  the  same  except  to
     correct a clerical or arithmetical error".
     It is  apparent that  what the  appellant seeks  by the
application  is	  not  the   correction	 of  a	clerical  or
arithmetical error.  What she  desires is a declaration that
the High  Court order  dated Ist  September, 1970  does	 not
affect her  rights  in	the  house  property  and  that	 the
direction to  restore possession to Pyare Lal is confined to
that portion only of the house property respecting which the
offence of trespass was committed so that she is not evicted
from the  portion in her possession. The appellant, in fact,
asks for  an  adjudication  that  the  right  to  possession
alleged by  her remains	 unaffected by	the order  dated Ist
September, 1970.  Pyare Lal  disputes that  the order is not
binding on  her and that she is entitled to the right in the
property claimed  by her.  Having considered  the matter, we
are not satisfied that the controversy can be brought within
the description "clerical or arithmetical error". A clerical
or  arithmetical   error  is   an  error  occasioned  by  an
accidental slip or omission of the court. It represents that
which the  court never	intended to  say.  It  is  an  error
apparent on  the face  of the record and does not depend for
its discovery  on argument  or disputation.  An arithmetical
error is a mistake of calculation, and a clerical error is a
mistake in  writing or	typing. Master	Construction Co. (P)
Ltd. v. State of Orissa and Another.
     The appellant  points out	that he invoked the inherent
power of the High Court saved by s. 482 of the Code and that
notwithstanding the  prohibition imposed  by s. 362 the High
Court had power to grant relief. Now it is well settled that
the inherent power of the
489
court  cannot	be  exercised	for  doing   that  which  is
specifically prohibited by the Code. Sankatha Singh v. State
of U.P.	 It is	true that  the prohibition in s. 362 against
the Court  altering or	reviewing its judgment is subject to
what is "otherwise provided by this Code or by any other law
for the time being in force". Those words, however, refer to
those provisions  only where  the Court	 has been  expressly
authorised by  the Code	 or other law to alter or review its
judgment.  The	 inherent  power   of  the   Court  is	 not
contemplated by	 the saving  provision contained  in section
362 and,  therefore, the attempt to invoke that power can be
of no avail.
     The High  Court, in  our opinion, is right in declining
to entertain  the application. The appeal must be dismissed.
But we	may observe  that anything said by the High Court in
the criminal  proceeding against Kailash Chandra Jain should
not be allowed to influence the judgment of the court in the
civil suits  mentioned above  or in  any proceeding  arising
therefrom.
     The appeal is dismissed.
N.V.K.					   Appeal dismissed.
490




