

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
New Bihar Biri Leaves Co. & Ors vs State Of Bihar & Ors on 6 January, 1981Equivalent citations: 1981 AIR  679, 1981 SCR  (2) 417
Author: R S Sarkaria
Bench: Sarkaria, Ranjit Singh
           PETITIONER:
NEW BIHAR BIRI LEAVES CO. & ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF BIHAR & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT06/01/1981

BENCH:
SARKARIA, RANJIT SINGH
BENCH:
SARKARIA, RANJIT SINGH
PATHAK, R.S.

CITATION:
 1981 AIR  679		  1981 SCR  (2) 417
 1981 SCC  (1) 537	  1981 SCALE  (1)1


ACT:
     Constitution of  India 1950, Articles 19(6) clauses (i)
& (ii)-Clauses	whether distinct and separate-Law covered by
the clauses whether to satisfy the test of reasonableness
     Article 19(1)(g) citizen's right to enter into contract
with State-Whether  fundamental right can be enforced though
contractual
     Bihar Kendu  Leaves (Control of Trade) Act 1973 & Bihar
Kendu Leaves  (Control of  Trade) Rules,  1973-Clause 13 and
Clause	4(bb)	of  agreement  prescribed  by  rules-Whether
unreasonable and violative of Articles 14 and 19

HELD:

     Kendu leaves used in the manufacture of bidis are grown
as forest  produce in  several States. On March 10, 1972 the
State of  Bihar issued	the Bihar  Kendu Leaves	 (Control of
Trade) Ordinance,  1972, which	was replaced  by  the  Bihar
Kendu Leaves  (Control of  Trade) Act, 1973. The purpose was
to create  a State  monopoly in	 the matter of sale of Kendu
leaves to  the manufacturers  of bidis to regulate the trade
in  relation  to  the  grower  of  Kendu  plants  and  their
collection and	sale through  the agency of the State to the
registered manufacturers  of bidis. Section 4, empowered the
State Government  for the  purpose of  purchase and  sale of
Kendu leaves  on its behalf, to appoint agents in respect of
different units.  Section 9  provided  that  the  authorised
agents will  be bound  to accept delivery of all those Kendu
leaves which  are fit  for the	purpose	 of  manufacture  of
bidis.
     In	 exercise   of	its  rule-making  powers  the  State
Government notified  the  Bihar	 Kendu	Leaves	(Control  of
Trade) Rules, 1972, which was continued by Section 23 of the
Act even  after the  repeal  of	 the  Ordinance.  Provisions
regarding the  disposal of Kendu leaves were made in Rule 9.
Sub-rule (I)  provided that Kendu leaves collected or likely
to be  collected shall	be sold	 or otherwise disposed of by
tender on  terms and  conditions  specified  in	 the  Tender
Notice. The  Tender was	 required  by  sub-rule	 (2)  to  be
advertised in  newspapers. Sub-rule  (9) provided  that	 the
successful tenderer  or successful bidder shall be appointed
as  purchaser  and  the	 entire	 quantity  of  Kendu  leaves
collected or  likely to be collected or such lesser quantity
out of	it as  may be  offered to  him by the State shall be
purchased by him on terms and conditions in the agreement to
be executed  by the  purchaser. Sub-rule  (10) required	 the
purchaser to execute an Agreement in Form `M' within 15 days
of the receipt of the order of appointment.
     By a Notification dated January 16, 1974 the Rules were
amended and  sub-clause (bb)  after clause 4(b) was added in
Form `M'  of the Agreement which provided that the purchaser
shall not  raise any  objection against the quality of Kendu
leaves or  shortage of	leaves. Condition  13 of  the Tender
Notice was  also incorporated  in the  statutory  Agreement,
Form `M' providing
418
that for  every unit  a minimum	 royalty will be `payable by
the purchaser,	and that this amount shall be payable by the
tenderer even  if by  the end  of the  season, the  price of
Kendu leaves at the offered rate, collected and delivered to
the purchaser,	fell short  of this amount, the amount being
payable before	the leaves  are utilized or taken out and if
not paid, realisable as arrears of land revenue.
     In	 their	writ  petitions	 the  petitioners  who	were
carrying on trade in Kendu leaves, assailed the Rules framed
under the  Act and  clause 13 and clause 4(bb) of the Tender
Notice and the Statutory Agreement and the notices of demand
issued demanding  royalty  in  respect	of  the	 undelivered
quantity of Kendu leaves.
     It	 was   contended  that:	  (i)  the   provisions	 and
conditions contained in clause 4(bb) and clause 13 amount to
an unreasonable	 restriction on freedom to carry on trade or
business in  Kendu leaves guaranteed under Article 19(1) (g)
of the	Constitution  and  that	 they  are  not	 within	 the
protection of  sub-clause (ii)	in the second part of clause
(6) of	Article	 19;  (ii)  that  the  provisions  in  their
immediate operation  and effect,  are harsh, unconscionable,
arbitrary, unfair  and oppressive, thereby violating Article
14, (iii)  the foreclosure  of the right of the purchaser to
refuse delivery	 on the	 ground of  the leaves	offered, not
being of  requisite quality, is inconsistent and ultra vires
of the	proviso to Section 9(1) of the Act and (iv) that the
auctions are  held in  January, while  the  Agents  are	 not
appointed till	March or  April, the  plucking	season,	 and
consequently, no  reasonable estimate  of the expected yield
is possible.
     The respondents  argued that  (i) there is a paucity of
skilled people	who could  be employed	as  Agents  and	 the
prevailing practice is that the persons appointed as Agents,
are sponsored  by the  purchasers and  that the terms of the
Agreement, taken  as a	whole are  not one-sided,  (ii) if a
person voluntarily  takes upon	himself under the terms of a
contract, such risks and chances of benefit, he has no right
in the	event of  suffering a  loss to be compensated for it
even under  the ordinary  law in a suit, much less the Court
of writ	 jurisdiction can  grant any  such relief, (iii) the
right to  enter into a contract on particular terms with the
State is  not a	 fundamental right,  (iv) as the petitioners
had not	 paid amounts  required to  be adjusted	 against the
remuneration of	 the Agents  they are not entitled to relief
under Article  32, and	(v) the	 provisions are directly and
essentially related  to the  operation of  monopoly and,  as
such are  within the protection of sub-clause (ii) of clause
(6) of Art. 19.
     Dismissing the petitions and appeal
^
     HELD: 1.  The condition  in 4(bb) in the Tender Notices
and  the  statutory  agreement	is  couched  in	 peremptory,
drastic and  absolute language,	 not qualified	by any words
showing that  the bar envisaged in it will be attracted only
in cases  where the purchaser has had an earlier opportunity
to raise his objection but failed to do so, or, where he had
on an  earlier occasion	 raised such  an objection which was
heard  and   overruled	by  the	 competent  Forest  Officer.
Condition 4(bb) therefore is inconsistent with and repugnant
to Section  9(1), proviso of the Act which contains a built-
in-warranty, that  the Kendu leaves offered would be fit for
manufacture of bidis; that is to say, the leaves would be of
merchantable quality and as such, invalid. [442D-H]
419
     2. The  scheme of the Bihar Act and the Rules and Forms
including that	of the	impugned condition  13 was  designed
remove the  deficiencies, infirmities  and vices pointed out
in Rashbihar's Panda v. State of Orissa [1969] 3 S.C.R. 374.
The  impugned	condition   13	 satisfied   the   test	  of
reasonableness under  the first	 part of Articles 19(6). The
contention, that in actual operation, the impugned provision
(clause 13)  creates a	monopoly in  favour of	a  class  of
middlemen consisting of `Agents' and purchasers, and enables
them to	 earn unduly large profits at the cost of the public
or pluckers and growers is not acceptable.[439G-H, 440A-B]
     3. (i).  Clause (6) of Article 19 falls into two parts,
indicating that	 the two parts of the clause are intended to
be   distinct	 and   separate.   The	 words	 "reasonable
restrictions" which  find pivotal mention in the first part,
have not  been repeated	 in the	 second part  which omission
makes it  clear that a law covered by sub-clause (ii) is not
required to  satisfy the  test of  reasonableness under	 the
first part  of the  clause and no objection to have validity
of such a law is tenable on the ground that it infringes the
right guaranteed  under Article 19(1)(g). Sub-clause (ii) is
thus an	 exception to  the  main  substantive  provision  in
clause (1) of the Article. [431G-H, 432A-B]
     3(ii). The	 basic	and  essential	features  which	 are
directly and  immediately connected with the creation of the
State monopoly	are found in the body of the Act itself. The
provisions incorporated	 in the	 Forms of  Tender Notice and
Agreement are  merely subsidiary  or incidental	 provisions,
therefore, do  not fall	 within the protection of sub-clause
(ii) in the second part of Article 19(6). [432E-F]
     3(iii). Where  the business  to  be  carried  on  by  a
citizen is  in a  commodity, the  sale of  which is  a State
monopoly, conditioned by some statutory terms, (analogous to
the impugned  conditions) which	 in operation, have a direct
and immediate  impact on  the  fundamental  freedom  of	 the
citizen guaranteed  under Article  19(1)  (g),	the  citizen
cannot	enter  into  a	contract  with	the  Government	 for
purchase of  such a  commodity except on the statutory terms
laid down  by the  seller-State. The  Tender Notice  and the
Agreement  which   the	purchasers   enter  into   with	 the
Government,  although	couched	 in   statutory	 Forms,	 are
therefore, not bereft of their contractual character. [432G-
H, 433A & C]
     4. The  minimum royalty or price payable being fixed on
the basis  of 75  per cent  of the estimated annual yield in
standard bags  from the unit multiplied by the rates offered
and accepted.  Such an estimate, is made on the basis of the
average actual	yield from that unit for the preceding three
years. Such  an estimated yield is notified and published in
the Tender Notices every year. Purchasers in the trade, know
beforehand as  to what	they are  bidding for,	and they are
generally persons  who have  been in  the trade	 for several
years and, as such have a special knowledge of forming their
own estimates  of the  expected yield  and  the	 chances  of
profit and  loss from  that particular	unit in a particular
year. [433F-G]
     5. As  the chances	 of profit  and risks  of  loss	 are
evenly divided	between the seller-state and the purchasers,
it cannot  be said  that the impugned condition in clause 13
of  the	 Tender	 Notice	 and  the  Agreement  is  manifestly
unreasonable. The  impugned condition  13 is  a	 restriction
imposed in the general public interest. [434B-C]
     6. Although  the Act and the Rules contemplate that the
Agents appointed  by the  Government will  be under its full
control and liable to compensate
420
the Government	for any	 shortage, damage  or loss caused in
collection or  delivery or  any defect in the quality of the
leaves	collected,   to	 the   Government,  yet,  in  actual
practice, the real position is that the Agents are generally
persons sponsored by and otherwise, deeply interested in the
purchasers. [435B-C]
     7. The  agents are	 to be appointed every year at short
notice when the plucking season is at hand and as there is a
dearth of  suitable persons  having adequate  experience and
skill of  work as efficient agents, the Government is driven
into a	situation in  which they  have	to  appoint  persons
sponsored by  the purchasers  as Agents.  The  rules  framed
under the Act envisage a strict and exclusive control of the
Government over the Agents and their activities, and provide
for their  liability to	 compensate the	 Government for	 the
loss  occasioned   by  their   misconduct  or  neglect.	 The
condition in  condition 13  far from  creating a monopoly in
the trade  in favour  of middlemen,  operates as an ironclad
safeguard against  leakage of the public revenue by assuring
a minimum  return to  the public  exchequer from the sale of
Kendu leaves.  The provision  is aimed	to secure  the	full
benefit from  the trade	 to the	 State	leaving	 chances  of
making reasonable, marginal profit to the purchasers. [435C-
D, 439B-E]
     8. It is a fundamental principle of general application
that if	 a person  of his  own accord, accepts a contract on
certain terms  and works  out the  contract,  he  cannot  be
allowed to  adhere to  and abide by some of the terms of the
contract which	proved advantageous to him and repudiate the
other  terms   of  the	 same  contract	  which	  might	  be
disadvantageous to  him. The  maxim,  is  qui  approbat	 non
reprobat. A  party to  an instrument  or transaction  cannot
take advantage	of one part of a document or transaction and
reject the rest. [441E-H]
     Verschures	 Creameries   Ltd.  v.	Hull  &	 Netherlands
Steamship Co.  [1921] 2	 K  B.608  and	Douglas	 Menzies  v.
Umphelby [1908] A.C. 224 at p. 232 referred to.
     In the  instant case  the petitioners  had by  offering
highest bids  at public auctions or by Tenders, accepted and
worked out  the contracts  in the past but are now resisting
the demands  or other  action, arising	out of	the impugned
condition 13  on the ground that this condition is violative
of Article 19(1)(g) and 14 of the Constitution. The impugned
conditions though  bearing a  statutory	 complexion,  retain
their basic contractual character. Though a person cannot be
debarred from enforcing his fundamental rights on the ground
of estoppel or waiver, the principle which prohibits a party
to a  transaction from	approbating a part of its conditions
and reprobating	 the rest, is different from the doctrine of
estoppel or waiver. [442A-C]



JUDGMENT:
     ORIGINAL  JURISDICTION  :	Writ  Petitions	 Nos.  2222-
2252/77 & 121 to 125/79, 405 & 441/74, 46 & 47/75.
	  (Under Article 32 of the Constitution.)
			    AND
	      CRIMINAL APPEAL No. 300 OF 1974.
     Appeal by	Special Leave  from the	 Judgment and  Order
dated 14-2-1974	 of the	 Patna High  Court in  Criminal Writ
Jurisdiction No.
421
     F. S.  Nariman, Anil  B. Devan, J. B. Dadachanji, K. J.
John, J.S.  Sinha and  Tarini Prasad  for the Petitioners in
WPs. Nos. 121-125/79, 2222-2252/77 & 46-47/75.
     Y. S.  Chitale, K.	 K. Sinha  and S.  K. Sinha  for the
Petitioners in	W.P. Nos.  405 &  441/74  and  Crl.  A.	 No.
300/74.
     Lal Narain	 Sinha, Attorney General of India, Ram Balak
Mahto, and  U. P.  Singh for the Respondents Nos. 1-2 in all
W.Ps. and Appeal.
     Miss A.  Subhashini for  Respondent No.  3 in  WP	Nos.
2222-2252/77.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     SARKARIA,	J.-   The  common  question  that  has	been
seriously pressed  into	 argument  in  this  batch  of	writ
petitions  and	criminal  appeal  mentioned  in	 the  title,
relates to  the constitutional	validity  of  certain  Rules
framed under the State of Bihar under the Bihar Kendu Leaves
(Control of Trade) Act, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as the
'Act') particularly  clause 13,	 clause 4 (bb) of the Tender
Notice and  of the Statutory Agreement notified by the Bihar
Government in  the Bihar Government Gazette, and the notices
of demand  issued under	 the impugned  provisions  demanding
"royalty" from the petitioners in respect of the undelivered
quantity of Kendu leaves.
     All these	writ petitions	will be	 disposed of by this
common judgment.  The basic  question being  common, it will
suffice to  state the  facts giving  rise to  Writ Petitions
2222 to 2252 of 1977, filed by the New Bihar Bidi Leaves Co.
     The petitioners  in all these writ petitions are either
firms or  individuals carrying	on trade  in Kendu leaves in
the State  of  Bihar.  However,	 petitioner  No.  31  is  an
association of	traders in  Kendu leaves, of which the other
petitioners are members.
     Kendu leaves  are grown  as forest	 produce in  several
States,	 including  the	 States	 of  Bihar,  Orissa,  Andhra
Pradesh, Maharashtra,  Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh and a part of
Uttar Pradesh.	Under the  old system in Bihar, the right to
pluck and  extract Kendu  leaves from  a forest coupe carved
out by	the Forest  Department, was  auctioned by  the State
Government.
     On March  10, 1972,  while the State of Bihar was under
the President's rule, the Governor of Bihar issued the Bihar
Kendu  Leaves	(Control  of  Trade)  Ordinance,  1972.	 The
provisions of this Ordinance were continued under successive
Ordinances and	ultimately replaced  by the aforesaid Act of
1973. This  Act created State monopoly in the matter of sale
of Kendu leaves to the manufacturers of
422
bidis. Its  purpose is to regulate this trade in relation to
the grower  of Kendu  plants and  the collection and sale of
the same  through the  agency of the State to the registered
manufacturers of  bidis. Under	its scheme, a specified area
of Kendu  leaves is  divided into  units.  The	'grower'  is
defined as  'a grower  who holds lands on which Kendu plants
grow or	 who is in possession of such lands under a lease or
otherwise, and includes the State Government.' Under Section
3, the State Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, declare  any area  to be  a specified	area for the
purposes of  the Act  and divide  every such  specified area
into such number of units as it may deem fit. 'Unit' means a
sub-division of	 a specified  area constituted under Section
3. Under  Section 4,  the  State  Government  may,  for	 the
purpose of  purchase and sale of Kendu leaves on its behalf,
appoint agents	in respect  of different  units and any such
agent may be appointed in respect of more than, any one unit
but not more than three units. The terms, conditions and the
procedure for  appointment of agents have been prescribed by
the Rules  framed under	 the Act,  which we  shall presently
notice.	 Section   5  places   restriction  on	purchase  or
transport of  Kendu leaves.  Section 8	mandates the  Forest
Officer incharge  of a	Division to  set up  in each  unit a
number of  depots. Section  9 is  important and its material
part runs as under:
	  "(1)	The   State  Government	 or  its  authorised
     officer or	 agent shall  purchase Kendu  leaves offered
     for sale  and deliver  at the depot during the business
     hours at the rates fixed under Section 7:
     Provided that  it shall be open to the State Government
     or its  authorised officer	 or agent, for reasons to be
     communicated in  writing,	to  refuse  to	purchase  or
     accept delivery  of any  Kendu leaves  which, in  their
     opinion, are  not fit for the purpose of manufacture of
     bidis."
It will be seen that the proviso to sub-section (1) contains
a built-in  warranty inasmuch as it says that the authorised
agents will  be bound  to accept delivery of all those Kendu
leaves which,  in their	 opinion, are fit for the purpose of
manufacture of bidis. In other words, the Kendu leaves to be
purchased by the authorised agents of the Government must be
of merchantable quality.
     The next  relevant provision  is to be found in Section
11 which is as follows
	  "(1) Every  manufacturer of bidis within the State
     shall get	himself registered  within  such  period  on
     payment of	 such fee  and in  such	 manner	 as  may  be
     prescribed.
423
	  (2) Every  manufacturer of  bidis within the State
     registered	 under	 sub-section  (1)  shall  furnish  a
     declaration in  such form	by such	 date  and  in	such
     manner as may be prescribed."
Section 12 provides that Kendu leaves purchased by the State
Government or  by its  authorised officer or agent, shall be
disposed of  in such  manner as	 the  State  Government	 may
direct. Section 20 of the Act gives the State Government the
power to  make rules  subject to  the conditions of previous
publication, to carry out all or any of the purposes of this
Act. Sub-section  (2) of  that Section	provides  that	such
rules may  provide for	all or any of the following matters,
namely:-
	  "(a) procedure   to	 be   followed	 in   making
	       appointment of agents;
	  (b)  to (d) ..............;
	  (e)  the manner of registration under Section 10;
	  (f)  the manner of registration, the period within
	       which such registration shall be made and the
	       fee payable  thereof under sub-section (1) of
	       Section 11;
	  (g)  form of	declaration, authority to whom, date
	       by  which   and	the   manner  in  which	 the
	       declaration shall  be  furnished	 under	sub-
	       section (2) of Section 11;
	  (h) ............."
     In	 exercise  of  its  powers  under  the	then  extent
Ordinance analogous  to those  under Section  20, the  State
Government of Bihar notified the Bihar Kendu Leaves (Control
of Trade)  Rules, 1972	(for short the 'Rules'). These rules
were, as  already noticed,  continued by  Section 23  of the
Act, event after the repeal of the Ordinance concerned.
     Rule 2(8)	defines 'Purchaser' to mean a person to whom
Kendu leaves  have been	 sold by  the State Government under
Section 12 Under clause (1) of the same Rule, 'Standard bag'
means a	 bag containing 1000 standard gaddis of Kendu leaves
and where  the standard	 gaddis are not bagged, reference to
standard bag  shall be	construed as  a	 reference  to	1000
standard  gaddis   or  50,000  leaves.	Under  clause  (11),
"Standard gaddi" means a bundle containing 50 Kendu leaves.
     Rule 3  provides the  manner of  appointing agents. The
application for	 agency is to be submitted in Form "A". This
Form requires
424
the  applicant	 for  appointment   as	Agent	to  make   a
Declaration, inter alia, to this effect:
	  "I/We ........  hereby declare that I/We have read
     and understood  all the  provisions of  the Bihar Kendu
     Leaves (Control of Trade) Ordinance, 1972 and the rules
     made thereunder  and the conditions of agency mentioned
     in the  notice issued under rule 3(1) and I/we agree to
     abide by  the same.  I/we have personally inspected the
     unit No.....  if I/we  am/are appointed as an agent for
     the unit  mentioned above,	 I/we undertake	 to purchase
     from growers  and collect from land of State Government
     and deliver  a quantity of Kendu leaves on both counts,
     which shall  not be  less than  ..... Standard  bags as
     mentioned	in   the  notice.  I/we	 shall	execute	 the
     agreement with  the State Government in Form 'C' within
     15 days.
     Witness:
     1.
     2.				Signature of the applicant."
     Under sub-rule (7) of Rule 3, if, in the opinion of the
State Government,  it is  not possible	to select a suitable
agent for the purpose out of the persons who had applied for
appointment as	agent, or where any agency is terminated and
there is not sufficient time for calling fresh applications,
the State  Government may appoint any person as agent who in
their opinion  is suitable for the work. Such a person to be
appointed as  Agent is	required to furnish a declaration in
Form 'B'.  Sub-rule (9)	 requires that	on appointment as an
agent, the person so appointed shall execute an agreement in
Form 'C'  within fifteen days of the receipt of the order of
appointment, failing  which the	 appointment shall be liable
to be  cancelled and  upon such	 cancellation, the  security
deposit shall be forfeited; and the agent shall be liable to
pay the	 loss, if any, incurred by the State Government as a
result of  such cancellation  of the  appointment.  Then,  a
formula	 has   been  provided	as  to	 how  such  loss  on
cancellation of	 the appointment  shall be  calculated.	 The
loss so	 determined shall  be recoverable  from the agent or
surety as  arrears of  land revenue.  Sub-rule (10) requires
the agent  so appointed	 for a	particular unit	 to  deposit
security before	 signing the Agreement. It also provides how
the amount  to be  deposited should  be calculated. Sub-rule
(11) provides  that the	 agent shall  purchase Kendu  leaves
from growers  and from such labourers who pluck Kendu leaves
from the  Government forests  and other	 lands at  the depot
opened by  him or  ordered to  be opened  by the  Divisional
Forest Officer. Clause (ii) of sub-rule (11) lays
425
down that unless ordered by the Divisional Forest Officer or
an officer authorised by him in writing, the agent shall not
slacken or  stop the  purchase or  collection in  any  depot
within the unit. Sub-rule (12) requires the agent to deliver
immediately the	 Kendu leaves  purchased or collected by him
to the	purchaser appointed  for  the  unit.  Sub-rule	(13)
provides:
	  "The agent  shall maintain such account and submit
     such  periodical	returns	 to  the  Divisional  Forest
     Officer or	 to any	 other officer	authorised by him as
     may be directed by the Divisional Forest Officer."
Sub-rule (14)  requires the  agent  to	furnish	 a  list  of
persons employed  by him  with the  unit, immediately to the
Divisional Forest  Officer, and	 he is	bound to  remove any
such  person   whose  employment   is  objected	 to  by	 the
Divisional Forest  Officer. Sub-rule  (15) is  material	 and
reads as under:
	  "If the agent during the period of agency has duly
     observed and  performed all the terms and conditions of
     the agency	 to the satisfaction of the State Government
     and if  the State	Government is  satisfied that he has
     done his  best to	collect maximum	 quantity of  leaves
     from the unit, it may grant to the agent yearly renewal
     of agency	for a  period  to  be  fixed  by  the  State
     Government on  such terms	and  conditions	 as  may  be
     decided upon for each year."
Sub-rule (16) provides that the agent shall be advanced such
money for  the performance  of agency  as may be directed by
the State Government from time to time.
     Rule 6(7)	lays down  the procedure  of  enquiry  about
rejected Kendu	leaves.	 According  to	this  procedure,  on
receipt of a complaint under sub-section (2) of Section 9 of
the Act,  the officer  shall  hold  the	 enquiry  after	 the
necessary notice  to the  person  concerned  and  pass	such
orders in terms of sub-section (3) or (4) of Section 9 as he
deems fit.
     Rule 9  makes provision regarding the disposal of Kendu
leaves. Under sub-rule (1), Kendu leaves collected or likely
to be collected by the State Government or by its authorised
officer shall ordinarily be sold or otherwise disposed of by
tender on  such terms and conditions as are specified in the
Tender Notice and Tender Form issued by the State Government
or by  an officer authorised by the State Government in this
behalf. The  Tender Notice is required by sub-rule (2) to be
advertised in  newspapers and  in such	other manner  as the
State Government may deem-fit. Sub-rule (8)
426
provides:  "Notwithstanding   anything	contained   in	 the
foregoing provisions,  the  State  Government  may  sell  or
otherwise dispose  of Kendu leaves collected or likely to be
collected by  it or  by its officers or agents by auction on
such terms and conditions as may be decided by it." Sub-rule
(9) reads as under:
	  "The successful  tenderer or successful bidder, as
     the case  may be,	shall be  appointed as purchaser for
     the particular  unit, and	the entire quantity of Kendu
     leaves collected  or likely  to be	 collected from such
     unit or  such lesser  quantity out of it may be offered
     to him by the State, its officer or agent in such unit,
     shall be  purchased by  him in  such manner and on such
     terms  and	 conditions  as	 may  be  specified  in	 the
     agreement to  be executed	by such purchaser under sub-
     rule (10)."
     Sub-rule (10)  requires the  purchaser  to	 execute  an
Agreement in  Form 'M'	within 15 days of the receipt of the
order of  appointment. Sub-rule (11) requires such purchaser
before	signing	  the  agreement  to  deposit  the  security
calculated as  provided	 in  that  sub-rule.  Sub-rule	(13)
provides that  the purchaser,  if he  desires to consume the
leaves within  the unit or to remove the leaves delivered to
him outside  the unit  immediately or at any time before the
30th June,  shall pay  the purchase  price in  full for	 the
quantity of  leaves delivered  to him calculated at the rate
specified in  the purchaser's  agreement. If  the  purchaser
agrees in  writing to  keep the	 delivered leaves within the
unit under  his supervision  and risk  and  under  insurance
against theft, fire and wastage at his expense but under the
custody and  control of the Divisional Forest Officer he may
at the	time of delivery of leaves pay only such part of the
purchase price	of the delivered leaves, as may be specified
in the	purchaser's agreement.	The balance  of the purchase
price may  be paid  in instalments on the dates specified in
the purchaser's	 agreement or on any earlier date before the
leaves are  removed outside  the unit  or are  delivered for
consumption within  the unit. In no case the purchaser shall
be allowed  to remove  all the	leaves unless full price has
been paid.
     By Notification,  dated January  16, 1974, published in
the Extra-ordinary  Gazette of	Bihar Government of the same
date, the  Rules were  amended, and  sub-clause	 (bb)  after
clause 4(b)  was added	in Form	 'M' of	 the Agreement. This
sub-clause (bb) reads as under:
	  "The	purchaser  shall  not  raise  any  objection
     against the  quality of  Kendu leaves  or	shortage  of
     leaves in the standard gaddis."
427
This is	 one of	 the impugned provisions. The other impugned
provision is  to be  found in  condition (13)  of the Tender
Notices published  in the  Bihar Government  Gazette,  every
year inviting tenders for the purchase of Kendu leaves. This
condition (13)	which is  also incorporated in the statutory
Agreement (Form-M), runs as follows:
	  "For every  unit a minimum royalty will be payable
     by the purchaser. The amount of minimum royalty will be
     75%  of  the  amount  arrived  at	by  multiplying	 the
     notified yield  in standard  bags by  the offer made by
     the purchaser  per standard  bag. This  amount shall be
     payable by	 the tenderer  even if	by the	end  of	 the
     season, the  price of Kendu leaves at the offered rate,
     collected and delivered to the purchaser, fell short of
     this amount.  This whole  amount will be payable before
     the leaves	 are utilized or taken out and, if not paid,
     will be realised as arrears of land revenue."
     The  first	  proposition  canvassed   by  Mr.   Nariman
appearing for  the petitioners in Writ Petitions 405 and 441
of 1974,  is  the  Petitioners	argued	that  the  aforesaid
impugned provisions/conditions	comprised in  the  aforesaid
clause 4(bb)  and clause  (13)	amount	to  an	unreasonable
restriction on the petitioners' fundamental freedom to carry
on trade  or business  in  Kendu  leaves;  guaranteed  under
Article 19(1)(g)  of the  Constitution;	 that  the  impugned
provisions are	not within the protection of sub-clause (ii)
in the	second part  of clause (6) of Article 19 because the
impugned provisions  are  not  "integrally  and	 essentially
connected" with	 the creation  of the  monopoly in favour of
the State,  but are  only incidental  or subsidiary  to	 the
operation of the monopoly.
     In support	 of this  proposition, learned	counsel	 has
referred to the decisions of this Court in Akadesi Padhan v.
State of  Orissa and  Rashbihari  Panda	 etc.  v.  State  of
Orissa.
     The second	 proposition propounded	 by Mr.	 Nariman  is
that the  impugned provisions violate the fundamental rights
of the	petitioners' guaranteed	 under	Article	 14  of	 the
Constitution,  because	in  their  immediate  operation	 and
effect, they are harsh, unconscionable, arbitrary unfair and
oppressive; that  even where  the quantity  offered  to	 the
purchaser is  far less	than 75%  of the  notified estimated
yield,	or  the	 leaves	 offered  are  not  of	merchantable
quality, the  impugned provisions  unreasonably obligate the
purchaser to  pay royalty  for 75  per cent of the estimated
yield irrespective of whether the shortfall in the quantity
428
offered/delivered  or  the  unmerchantable  quality  of	 the
leaves offered	is due	to the	fraud or  negligence of	 the
Agent who, under the Rules, is supposed to be independent of
the  purchaser	and  under  the	 exclusive  control  of	 the
Government;   that    the   impugned	provisions   operate
irrationally  and   unfairly  as  they	make  no  discerning
distinction between  honest purchasers	who are not blamable
for the shortfall and dishonest purchasers who through their
fraud or  collusion  with  the	agent  or  officers  of	 the
Government contribute  to the  shortfall. Thus, the impugned
provisions tar	honest and dishonest purchasers with one and
the same brush which results in procrustean cruelty.
     Third, the	 impugned  provision  which  forecloses	 the
right of  the purchaser	 to refuse delivery on the ground of
the leaves  offered, not  being	 of  requisite	quality,  is
inconsistent with  and ultra vires of the Proviso to Section
9(1) of	 the Act which contains a built-in warranty that the
leaves offered	or delivered shall be fit for the purpose of
manufacture of bidis.
     Dr. Chitale,  appearing for  the  petitioners  in	Writ
Petitions 121  to 125  of 1979, has by and large adopted the
arguments of  Mr. Nariman.  He has  drawn our  attention  to
Annexure 'C'  to Writ  Petition 47  of 1975, wherein quite a
large number  of  instances  are  given	 to  show  that	 the
shortfall in  the actual delivery of the Kendu leaves to the
purchasers as  against the  estimated yield is considerable.
Learned counsel has emphasised that the auctions are held in
January, while	the Agents  are not  appointed till March or
April, which  is the  plucking season,	and in	January,  no
reasonable estimate of the expected yield is possible. It is
maintained that	 the allegations  in  the  counter-affidavit
filed on  behalf of  the  State	 to  the  effect,  that	 the
purchasers inspect the units and make their own estimates of
the expected yield is factually incorrect because in January
no such estimate is possible.
     Dr.  Dewan,   who	has   appeared	for   some  of	 the
petitioners, cited  Maneka Gandhi's  case in  support of his
contention, that the impugned provisions in their direct and
inevitable effect,  impinge upon  the fundamental  rights of
the petitioners	 guaranteed under  Articles 14 and 19(1) (g)
of the Constitution. Learned counsel contrasted the impugned
provisions with	 the Rules  in vogue  in the State of Andhra
Pradesh, which, according to him, have a reasonable basis.
     Mr.  K.  S.  Sinha,  appearing  for  the  appellant  in
Criminal Appeal	 300 of 1974, submitted that the validity of
the impugned  provisions was  indirectly  involved  in	this
appeal, though	in a  different context.  It is	 pointed out
that the permit to remove the leaves was refused to
429
the appellant  on the  ground that  he had  taken  away	 the
leaves without	paying 75  per cent  of the  royalty and had
contravened Rule 16. The point sought to be made out is that
if the	impugned Rules are not held to be valid, this appeal
must, in consequence, succeed.
     On the  other hand,  Mr. L. N. Sinha, learned Attorney-
General submits on behalf of the respondents that there is a
paucity of  skilled people  who could be employed as Agents;
that in	 actual practice the persons appointed as Agents are
sponsored by the purchasers.
     (i) It  is submitted  that the  terms of the Agreement,
taken as  a whole,  are not  one-sided.	 Whereas  under	 the
conditions of  the  Tender  Notice  and	 the  Agreement	 the
purchasers voluntarily bind themselves to pay the full price
of  the	  unit	which  is  fixed  according  to	 the  Rules,
irrespective of	 any shortfall	in the	quantity offered and
delivered, they,  under the  terms of the same Agreement get
the benefit  of purchasing Kendu leaves offered in excess of
75 per	cent of the estimated yield at the concessional rate
of 55 per cent only of the purchase price. It is argued that
if the	conditions of  the Tender  Notice and  the statutory
Agreement are  considered as a whole, it is evident that the
risks of  loss and  chances of	benefit are  equally divided
between the purchasers and the State.
     (ii) It  is stressed  that what  is sold at the time of
auction is  the estimated  produce from a unit, as such, and
the highest bidder or tenderer gets the contract to purchase
that unit at a price the minimum of which is fixed at 75% of
the amount  arrived at by multiplying the notified estimated
yield in  terms of standard bags from that unit. It is urged
that (if  a person  voluntarily takes upon himself under the
terms of  a contract,  such risks and chances of benefit, he
has no	right in  the  event  of  suffering  a	loss  to  be
compensated for	 it even  under the  ordinary law in a suit,
much less  the Court  of writ jurisdiction can grant him any
such relief). It is pointed out that actually, in 110 out of
1000 units,  that yield	 exceeded in the notified estimates,
and as	a result,  the purchasers reaped full benefit of the
excess supply at concessional rates.
     (iii) (a)	It is  emphasised that	the liability of the
petitioners to	pay the whole price for the unit arises from
the contract and, as such, it cannot be considered to have a
direct impact on the fundamental right of the petitioners to
carry on  their trade  or business;  that the right to enter
into a	contract on particular terms with the State is not a
fundamental right.  Even this  Court-proceeds the  argument-
cannot reconstruct  the	 terms	and  conditions	 voluntarily
agreed between the petitioners and the State.
430
     (iii) (b)	It is argued that it is not a fit case to be
decided under  Article 32  of the  Constitution, because  in
several of these petitions the purchasers (petitioners) were
in default,  inasmuch  as  they	 did  not  pay	the  amounts
required to  be adjusted  against the  remuneration  of	 the
Agents; that in most of the cases the purchasers reaped that
full benefits  of the contract and only in stray cases, they
suffered loss;	that since they had availed of the chance of
reaping and  advantage, they could not turn round and attack
the validity  of the  terms and	 conditions of	the contract
which they had voluntarily made and worked out.
     (iv) Another  point sought	 to be	made out is that the
impugned provisions  are directly and essentially related to
the operation  of the monopoly and, as such, fall within the
protection of sub-clause (ii) of clause (6) of Art. 19.
     (v) In  the  alternative,	it  is	submitted  that	 the
impugned provisions satisfy the test of reasonableness under
the first  part of  clause (6)	of the	said Article, and in
applying that  test the voluntary nature of the contract and
the obligations	 willingly undertaken  by the purchaser with
all the risks of loss and chances of gain should not be lost
sight of that a purchaser who acts on a contract voluntarily
entered into  by him  is precluded  from repudiating some of
its conditions	which involve  risk of	loss and  to  accept
those which are advantageous to him.
     In support of the proposition that one who has received
the benefits  of statute  is precluded	from  attacking	 the
constitutionality of  a condition  attached by	the statute,
the learned Attorney-General has referred to these decisions
of the	Supreme Court  of United States: Berth Fisheries Co.
v. Industrial  Commission of  the State	 of  Wisconian;	 St.
Louis Casting  Co. v. Construction Co.; and United Food Fuel
Gas Co. v. Rail Road Commission.
     In reply,	Mr. Nariman submits that writ petitions have
been filed  from  1973	onwards	 by  various  purchasers  to
challenge  the	validity  of  the  impugned  provisions,  as
notified every	year for inviting tenders, in the High Court
or in  this Court,  and from  time to  time  interim  orders
staying the  operation of  the impugned provisions have been
issued either  by the High Court or this Court; that in view
of  this,  it  cannot  be  said	 that  the  petitioners	 are
precluded from	challenging the	 validity  of  the  impugned
provisions  on	 the  ground   of  acquiescence,  waiver  or
estoppel. It is maintained that fundamental rights cannot be
waived,
431
particularly those  under Article 14 of the Constitution and
the  principle	 of  estoppel  enunciated  in  the  American
decisions is  not applicable  in India.	 In support  of this
argument, reference  has been  made to	the decision of this
Court in  Basheshar Nath  v. The Commissioner of Income-tax,
Delhi & Rajasthan & Anr.
     The learned Attorney-General further submitted that his
argument was  not to  the effect  that the  petitioners were
incompetent to enforce their fundamental right on the ground
of waiver  or estoppel;	 but that  a person  who voluntarily
enters into  a contract cannot retain the benefit accrued to
him thereunder	and repudiate the other part of the contract
which might have occasioned loss to him; that this principle
is different from that of waiver or estoppel.
     The first	question for  consideration is,	 whether the
impugned provisions fall within the protection of sub-clause
(ii) of Article 19(6) and therefore, it is not necessary for
those provisions to satisfy the test of reasonableness under
the first part of clause (6) of the Article.
     The relevant part of clause (6) reads thus:
	  "(6) Nothing	in sub-clause (g) of the said clause
     shall affect  the operation  of any  existing law in so
     far as it imposes, or prevent the State from making any
     law imposing,  in the  interests of the general public,
     reasonable restrictions  on the  exercise of  the right
     conferred by  the said  sub-clause, and, in particular,
     nothing  in   the	said  sub-clause  shall	 affect	 the
     operation of  any existing	 law in so far as it relates
     to, or  prevent the  State from making any law relating
     to,-
	  (i) ....................................
	  (ii) the  carrying  on  by  the  State,  or  by  a
	       Corporation owned or controlled by the State,
	       of any  trade, business, industry or service,
	       whether	to   the  exclusion,   complete	  or
	       partial, of citizens or otherwise."
     It will  be seen  that clause (6) falls into two parts.
The first  part commences  with the phrase: "Nothing in sub-
clause (g) of the said clause (1) of the Article". Phrase to
the same  effect, with the addition of pre-fixed words "and,
in particular"	are repeated  at  the  commencement  of	 the
second part,  also. This indicates that the two parts of the
clause are  intended to	 be distinct  and separate. Further,
the  words  "reasonable	 restrictions"	which  find  pivotal
mention in the
432
first part, have not been repeated in the second part, which
omission makes	it clear  that a  law covered  by sub-clause
(ii) is	 not required  to satisfy the test of reasonableness
under the  first part  of the clause and no objection to the
validity of  such a  law is  tenable on	 the ground  that it
infringes the right guaranteed under Article 19(1) (g). Sub-
clause (ii)  is thus  in the  nature of	 an exception to the
main substantive provision in clause (1) of the Article. Its
language therefore,  which is explicitly restrictive, has to
be strictly  construed. The protection of sub-clause (ii) in
the second  part is, in terms, available to the law only "in
so far as it relates to" the carrying on by the State, or by
a Corporation  owned or	 controlled by	the  State,  of	 any
trade, business,  industry, or	service	 to  the  exclusion,
complete or  partial of the citizens or otherwise. The ambit
of the	words "in so far as it relates to" in the context of
sub-clause (ii)	 in the	 second part  of clause (6), came up
for consideration before this Court in Akadasi Padhan's case
(ibid). Gajendragadkar, J., as he then was, speaking for the
Court, held  that only those provisions of the law which are
"integrally and	 essentially" connected with the creation of
the monopoly  are protected  under the second part of clause
(6), but those provisions which are not absolutely essential
for  creating  the  monopoly,  but  are	 merely	 incidental,
subsidiary or  helpful to  the operation  of the monopoly do
not fall  under the  second part  of clause  (6)  and  their
validity must  be judged,  under the  first part  of Article
19(6).
     Now, let us apply this test to the provisions which are
impugned  in   the  instant   case.  These   provisions	 are
incorporated in the Forms of Tender Notice and the Agreement
by Rules  framed under	the Act.  The  basic  and  essential
features which	are directly  and immediately connected with
the creation  of the  State monopoly  are to be found in the
body  of   the	Act,  itself.  In  any	case,  the  impugned
provisions are	merely subsidiary  or incidental  provisions
relating to  the operation  of the  monopoly.  The  impugned
provisions, therefore,	do not fall within the protection of
sub-clause (ii) in the second part of Article 19 (6).
     The question,  however, still remains whether the right
to enter  into a contract with the State on particular terms
is a fundamental right falling within the purview of Article
19 (1)	(g). The  learned Attorney-General maintains that it
is not.
     Whatever may  be the  position with regard to contracts
relating to  other matters, where the business to be carried
on by  a citizen  is in	 a commodity, the sale of which is a
State  monopoly,   conditioned	by   some  statutory  terms,
analogous to  the impugned  conditions, which, in operation,
have a direct and immediate impact on the fundamental
433
freedom of  the citizen	 guaranteed under  Article 19(1)(g),
the citizen cannot enter into a contract with the Government
for purchase  of such  a commodity  except on  the statutory
terms laid  down by  the seller-State.	Sale of Kendu leaves
for  manufacture  of  bidis  being  a  State  monopoly,	 the
petitioners-purchasers could,  if they	so desired, purchase
the Kendu  leaves only	in  the	 manner	 prescribed  by	 the
statutory rules	 on terms  and conditions  notified  in	 the
Tender Notices.	 Even so,  these conditions leave sufficient
room to	 the free  volition  of	 the  intending	 purchasers,
particularly in	 the matter  of fixing	the  rates  and	 the
minimum	 price	payable	 for  the  estimated  yield  from  a
particular unit in terms of standard bags. The Tender Notice
and the	 Agreement which  the purchasers enter into with the
Government, although  couched in  statutory Forms,  are	 not
bereft of their contractual character, either.
     Since  the	 impugned  provisions  do  not,	 as  already
noticed, fall  within the  protection of  sub-clause (ii) in
the second part of clause (6), they must satisfy the test of
being a	 reasonable restriction under the first part of that
clause.
     The first point in this connection to be determined is,
what actually  is sold	to the purchasers under the terms of
the Tender  Notice and	the statutory  Agreement ?  Is it an
estimated yield of a unit in terms of standard bags which is
sold or	 the actual  yield in terms of standard bags offered
or delivered  ? From  the scheme  of the Rules, particularly
Rule 9(9) extracted in a foregoing part of this judgment, it
is clear  that what  is sold to the successful bidder at the
annual auction	is  the	 entire	 quantity  of  Kendu  leaves
collected or  likely to	 be collected from a particular unit
or such	 lesser quantity  out of that unit as may be offered
to him by the State or its agent or officer for a particular
year at	 a price  called `royalty'.  The minimum  royalty or
price payable being fixed on the basis of 75 per cent of the
estimated annual  yield	 in  standard  bags  from  the	unit
multiplied by  the  rates  offered  and	 accepted.  Such  an
estimate, as  it appears  from the counter-affidavit is made
on the	basis of the average actual yield from that unit for
the preceding  three  years.  Such  an	estimated  yield  is
notified and  published in  the Tender	Notices every  year.
Purchasers in  the trade,  therefore, know before-hand as to
what they  are bidding for. Purchasers are generally persons
who have  been in  the trade  for several years and as such,
have a	special knowledge  of forming their own estimates of
the expected  yield and	 the chances of profit and loss from
that particular	 unit in a particular year. While it is true
that the  bidders have	to enter into Agreement on the terms
and conditions	notified by the Government, yet it cannot be
lost sight of that in spite of the fact that
434
the impugned provisions in Condition 13 of the Agreement and
the Tender  Notice in  1973 and the impugned Condition 4(bb)
has been  notified  annually  since  the  amendment  of	 the
statutory Forms	 in January  1974, the petitioners and their
fellowmen in  the trade have been offering rates of bids and
entering  into	 agreement  on	 the  notified	 terms	 and
conditions, including  the impugned  provisions. Only  a few
writ petitions	have been  filed now  and  then	 by  certain
purchasers who	suffered loss,	to challenge  these impugned
provisions since  1973. In view of the fact that the chances
of profit  and risks  of loss are evenly divided between the
seller-State and  the purchasers  and in  the light  of	 the
aforesaid historical  background, it cannot be said that the
impugned condition in clause 13 of the Tender Notice and the
Agreement is manifestly unreasonable. The impugned Condition
13 is  a restriction imposed in the general public interest.
Fixation of  a minimum price on the basis of estimated yield
from a	particular unit	 in a particular year operates as an
insurance against  loss or  leakage of public Revenue due to
connivance or  collusion between purchasers on the one hand,
and the	 servants and  agents of  the  seller-State  on	 the
other. This  method also  assures  a  minimum  wage  to	 the
pluckers of  the Kendu	leaves who,  as has been affirmed in
the counter-affidavit of the respondent-State, are generally
Adivasis  or  persons  belonging  to  economically  backward
classes.
     We are  unable to	accept the contention of the learned
counsel for  the petitioners,  that the	 impugned provisions
are harsh  and unreasonable  inasmuch as  they obligate	 the
purchasers to  pay for	the undelivered	 shortfall of  Kendu
leaves even where such shortfall is due to the negligence or
fraud of  the Agent of the Government. The real position has
been explained	in the	counter-affidavit filed on behalf of
the State in Writ Petitions 2222 to 2252 of 1977, thus :
	  "Technically speaking the Agents were appointed by
     the State	Government but the persons so appointed were
     actually sponsored	 by the	 respective purchasers.	 The
     Agents were  the persons  of the  purchasers  and	were
     loyal to their old masters. This is an incontrovertible
     fact. In  most of	the cases  the agents  got the	full
     amount  of	  their	 commission   and  handling  charges
     adjusted towards the purchase price of the units at the
     end of  collection season.	 Specific instances  are  on
     record  that  in  many  cases  the	 Agents	 were  close
     relatives	such   as  father,  sons,  brothers  of	 the
     purchasers. In  the case  of  firms,  the	Agents	were
     partners in the same firm. In some cases the purchasers
     and the Agents interchanged their positions. Purchasers
     became Agents while the latter
435
     became purchasers. This was a common trick of the trade
     which is still in vogue.
     Some of  the instances showing the relationship between
the petitioners/purchasers  and the  Agents are tabulated in
Annexure `A' hereto."
     Although  the   Act  and	the  Rules  noticed  earlier
contemplate that the Agents appointed by the Government will
be under  its full  control and	 liable	 to  compensate	 the
Government for	any  shortage,	damage	or  loss  caused  in
collection or  delivery or  any defect in the quality of the
leaves	collected,   to	 the   Government,  yet,  in  actual
practice, the real position is that the Agents are generally
persons sponsored by and otherwise, deeply interested in the
purchasers. In	their counter-affidavit,  the Government has
explained that	there is a dearth of suitable persons having
adequate experience  and skill	of work as efficient Agents.
The Agents  are to  be appointed  every year at short notice
when the  plucking season  is at  hand. Circumstances  being
what they  are, the Government is driven into a situation in
which  they   have  to	appoint	 persons  sponsored  by	 the
purchasers as Agents. From this real factual position, viz.,
the close  bond and  rapport between  the purchasers and the
agents, two  inferences arise.	First, that  at the  time of
auction, the  intending purchasers are in a position to form
a reasonable estimate of the return which they are likely to
have for  the year  concerned from  that particular  unit or
units for  which they offered the rates. Second, that if the
purchase price	were to	 be fixed  not on  the basis  of any
estimated annual  yield from  a particular  unit but  on the
basis of  the quantity	actually delivered, the risk of loss
or  leakage  of	 public	 revenue  by  reason  of  fraud	 and
collusion  between   the  purchasers  and  the	agents	will
manifestly increase. Looked at from this angle also, against
the real  factual  background,	the  impugned  Condition  13
cannot be said to be unreasonable.
     Mr. Nariman  contended that if the factual position, as
stated in  the counter-affidavit  filed	 on  behalf  of	 the
State, is  correct, then  the impugned	condition 13 will be
hit by	the ratio  of this  Court's decisions  in Rashbihari
Panda etc.  v. State  of Orissa	 (ibid) and Akadasi Padhan's
case (ibid),  because in that situation the conclusion would
be ineluctable	that the  monopoly is  being worked  by	 the
State not  for	its  exclusive	benefit	 or  in	 the  public
interest but  to benefit  a class of profiteers comprised of
the purchasers and their agents, thereby creating a monopoly
within a monopoly.
     In order to appreciate this contention, it is necessary
to notice  Rashbihari Panda's  case. To	 regulate  trade  in
Kendu  leaves	and  prevent  exploitation  of	growers	 and
pluckers, the State of Orissa enacted
436
the Orissa  Kendu Leaves  (Control of  Trade) Act.  1961. By
Section 3  of that  Act, which	is analogous to Section 3 of
the Bihar  Act, no  person other  than	the  Government,  an
authorised officer  of the Government, or an agent appointed
by the	Government, is	entitled to  purchase  or  transport
Kendu  leaves;	 and  under  Section  4	 of  that  Act,	 the
Government is  authorised to  fix the  price  at  which	 the
leaves shall be purchased from the growers by the officer or
agent of  the Government.  Section 10  of that	Act provided
that the Kendu leaves purchased shall be sold or disposed of
in such	 manner as  the Government  may	 direct,  and  under
Section 11,  at least one-half of the net profits derived by
the Government is to be paid to Samitis and Gram Panchayats.
In Akadasi  Padhan's case  (ibid), a  grower of Kendu leaves
challenged Sections  3 and  4 and  Rule 7(5) made under that
Act on	the ground that it contravened his fundamental right
under Articles 14 and 19(1)(a) and (g) in this Court. It was
held that  Sections 3  and 4  did not infringe Article 19(6)
(ii), but  the State Government was incompetent to implement
the provisions	of the	Act and give effect to its monopoly,
because the  agents appointed  were not really agents of the
Government but	were authorised	 to carry  on trade  in	 the
leaves purchased  not on  behalf of  the Government  but  on
their own  account, and that it thus gave rise to a monopoly
in favour  of the  agents which was not protected by Article
19(6) (ii) since the law cannot be used by the State for the
private benefit	 of agents.  After the	decision in  Akadasi
Padhan's case,	the Orissa  State made	some changes  in the
implementation of  its monopoly. In 1966, it invited tenders
from persons  desirous of  purchasing Kendu leaves purchased
by the	officers and  agents of	 the Government.  During the
years 1966  and 1967,  the prices of Kendu leaves ruled very
high and  when sales were effected by public auction, prices
considerably in	 excess	 of  those  at	which  tenders	were
accepted were  realised. Early	in 1968,  the State  evolved
another scheme under which, it offered to renew the licences
of  those  traders  who	 in  the  State's  view	 had  worked
satisfactorily in the previous year and had paid the amounts
due from  them regularly.  The scheme  was objected  to, and
realising that, the scheme arbitrarily excluded many persons
interested in  the trade,  and hence  was objectionable, the
Government decided to invite offers for advance purchases of
Kendu  leaves	but  restricted	  the  invitation  to  those
individuals  who  had  carried	out  the  contracts  in	 the
previous year without default and to the satisfaction of the
Government that	 is, the existing contractors were given the
exclusive right	 to make  offers to  purchase Kendu  leaves.
This new  method of  offering to  enter into  agreements for
advance purchases  of Kendu  leaves  by	 private  offers  in
preference to  open  competition,  was	challenged  by	writ
petitions in the High Court as
437
violative  of  the  petitioner's  fundamental  rights  under
Articles 14 and 19(1) (g).
     Reversing the  decision of	 the High Court, this Court,
in appeal, held,
	  The validity	of a  law by which the State assumed
     the monopoly  to trade  in a  given commodity has to be
     judged by	the test  whether the entire benefit arising
     therefrom is to enure to the State, and the monopoly is
     not used as a cloak for conferring private benefit upon
     a limited	class of persons. The monopoly of purchasing
     Kendu leaves  under Section  3 may	 be held to be valid
     if, it  be administered  only for	the benefit  of	 the
     State. Similarly, the right to sell or dispose of Kendu
     leaves by the State under Section 10, in such manner as
     the Government  may direct,  would be  valid if  it  be
     exercised in  public interest  and	 not  to  serve	 the
     private interest and not to serve the private interests
     of any person or class of persons. The profit resulting
     from the  sale must  be for  the public benefit and not
     for  private  gain.  Section  11  also  emphasises	 the
     concept that  the machinery  of sale or disposal of the
     leaves  must   also  be  geared  to  serve	 the  public
     interest. If  the scheme of disposal creates a class of
     middlemen who  could purchase  from the  Government  at
     concessional   rates    and    earn    large    profits
     disproportionate to  the nature of the service rendered
     or	 duty	performed  by  them,  it  cannot  claim	 the
     protection of  Article 19(6)  (ii) as it is not open to
     the Government  to create a monopoly in favour of third
     parties from its own monopoly.
			  (Head-note of the Official Report)
It was further held :
	  "The right  to make offers being open to a limited
     class of  persons the  schemes effectively shut out all
     other persons carrying on trade in Kendu leaves as well
     as new  entrants into  the	 trade.	 Both  the  schemes,
     evolved by	 the Government, namely, the one of offering
     to enter  into contracts  with certain named licencees,
     and the  other of	inviting tenders  from licencees who
     had in  the previous  year carried	 out their contracts
     satisfactorily gave  rise to a monopoly in the trade in
     the leaves	 to certain  traders and  singled out  other
     traders for  discriminating treatment.  Therefore, they
     were  violative   of  the	 fundamental  right  of	 the
     petitioners under	Articles 14 and 19(1) (g) and as the
     schemes were not integrally and
438
     essentially'  connected   with  the   creation  of	 the
     monopoly, they  were not  protected  by  Article  19(6)
     (ii).
     It was further observed that if the only anxiety of the
Government was	to  ensure  due	 performance  by  those	 who
submitted  tenders,   Government   could   devise   adequate
safeguards. But the classification based on the circumstance
that certain  existing contractors  had	 carried  out  their
obligation  in	the  previous  year  regularly	and  to	 the
satisfaction of the Government, is not based on any real and
substantial  distinction   bearing  a  just  and  reasonable
relation to  the objects  sought to  be achieved namely, the
effective execution  of the monopoly in public interest, the
prevention of  exploitation of pluckers and growers of Kendu
leaves, or  the securing of the full benefit from the trade,
to the State.
     On the  basis of  this reasoning,	it was	finally held
that the scheme could not be supported on the ground that it
imposed	 reasonable  restrictions,  within  the	 meaning  of
Article 19(6), on the fundamental rights of traders to carry
on business in Kendu leaves. Hence, the plea that the action
of the	Government was	bona fide  could not be an effective
answer to that challenge.
     It may  be noted  that the	 decision of  this Court  in
Rashbihari's case  (ibid) was announced on January 16, 1969.
The Bihar  Act, with  which we	are concerned, was passed in
1973. The  Bihar Legislature,  therefore could	not  but  be
aware of  the unconstitutional	features pointed out by this
Court in  the schemes of the Orissa Act and the Rules framed
thereunder. Care  has been  taken by  the Bihar Legislature,
and the	 Government to	exercise the scheme of the Bihar Act
and the	 Rules and Forms framed or prescribed thereunder, of
the vices  from which  the  schemes  of	 Orissa	 Legislation
suffered. This will be clear from a comparative study of the
Orissa schemes	and the	 Bihar scheme.	Firstly,  under	 the
Orissa schemes,	 the monopoly  was not	being worked for the
entire benefit	of  the	 State	or  in	the  general  public
interest, but  was being  used as  a  cloak  for  conferring
private benefit	 upon a limited class of persons. The offers
for purchasing	Kendu leaves were restricted to a particular
class of  contractors and  were	 not  open  to	the  general
public. This  vice  does  not  exist  in  the  Bihar  scheme
including  the	 scheme	 of  the  impugned  provisions.	 The
notified estimate  annual yield	 for a unit or units is sold
either by  inviting tenders  from the public by publishing a
Tender Notice  or by  public auction after a similar notice.
Any person  who wants to carry on the business of purchasing
Kendu leaves  for the  purpose of  manufacture of  Bidis  is
entitled to  submit his	 offer in the prescribed Tender Form
in response  to the public notice inviting tenders, or offer
his bid at the auction, if the disposal is by public
439
auction. Secondly,  the scheme	of disposal envisaged by the
impugned provisions  of the  Orissa Act and the Orissa rules
created a  class of  middlemen who  could purchase  from the
Government at  concessional rates  and	earn  large  profits
disproportionate to  the service  rendered or duty performed
by them. In contrast with this, the Bihar scheme in question
does not  operate to  create any  monopoly in  favour of any
particular class  of purchasers.  Nor does  the Bihar scheme
enable the  purchasers to  make unduly	large profits at the
cost of the public revenue or others. Even if the agents, in
actual practice,  are persons  sponsored by  the purchasers,
then also,  the rules  framed under the Bihar Act envisage a
strict and  exclusive control  of the  Government  over	 the
Agents and their activities, and provide for their liability
to compensate  the Government  for the	loss  occasioned  by
their misconduct  or neglect.  Under the  impugned Condition
13,  the  minimum  price  payable  for	the  unit  or  units
concerned by  a purchaser  is 75  per cent  of the  notified
estimated yield	 from  that  unit  or  units,  in  terms  of
standard bags  multiplied by the rates or bid offered by the
purchaser and accepted by the Government, even if the actual
yield from  that unit or units falls short of 75 per cent of
the estimated  yield. This  condition far  from	 creating  a
monopoly in the trade in favour of middlemen, operates as an
ironclad safeguard  against leakage of the public revenue by
assuring a  minimum return  to the public exchequer from the
sale of	 Kendu leaves.	The provision is aimed to secure the
full benefit  from the trade to the State leaving chances of
making reasonable, marginal profit to the purchasers.
     It was  observed in Rashbihari's case, that it would be
in the	interest of  State to  invite tenders  in  the	open
market from  all persons  irrespective of their having taken
contracts in  the previous  year. This	suggestion has	been
adopted by the scheme of the Bihar Act and the Rules and the
Forms of  Tender Notice and Agreement prescribed thereunder.
Some  other  defects  pointed  out  by	this  Court  in	 the
operation of  the Orissa  schemes, were	 that the Government
had not	 estimated the	crop and  the prevailing  prices  of
Kendu leaves  about the	 time when offers were made, nor the
conditions in  the market,  nor offers	of higher prices and
the likelihood	of offerers  of higher	prices carrying	 out
their obligations.  The scheme	of the	Bihar  Act  and	 the
Rules, and Forms including that of the impugned condition 13
is designed  to remove	the  deficiencies,  infirmities	 and
vices pointed out by this Court in Rashbihari's case.
     For  these	  reasons,  we	are  unable  to	 accept	 the
contention, that in actual operation, the impugned provision
(clause 13)  creates a	monopoly in  favour of	a  class  of
middlemen consisting of `Agents' and pur-
440
chasers, and  enables them  to earn  unduly large profits at
the cost of the public or pluckers and growers.
     The  impugned   Condition	13  satisfies  the  test  of
reasonableness under  the first	 part of  Article 19(6). We,
therefore, repel  the challenge	 to  the  validity  of	that
condition on the ground of Article 19(6).
     The next  question is  whether the	 impugned provisions
are violative  of the  fundamental rights of the petitioners
under Article  14 of  the Constitution. The argument is that
these provisions treat unequals as equals, even where crying
dissimilarities exist  and thus	 their operation  results in
Procrustean cruelty.
     The point	sought to  be made  out is  that even if the
shortfall in the quantity supplied or the substandard nature
of the quality offered to the purchaser is solely due to the
fraud, negligence  or misconduct  of the Agent or servant of
the Government, the loss due to such shortfall or deficiency
in quality  must fall  on the purchaser, notwithstanding the
fact that he (purchaser) was in no way privy or contributory
to that	 fraud, negligence  or misconduct  of the  Agent  or
Government servant  and thus  the impugned provisions do not
make any  discerning distinction  between honest  purchasers
and  dishonest	 purchasers,  but   tar	 those	dissimilarly
situated classes  with one  and the same brush. The argument
though attractive, does not stand a close examination.
     At the  time of inviting Tenders in the prescribed Form
or inviting  purchasers	 to  bid  at  the  publication,	 all
tenderers or  bidders are  treated equally in the sense that
they can  offer their rates or bids subject to the statutory
conditions  including	the   impugned	 provisions.   While
accepting the  highest Tender  of rates	 per standard bag or
the  highest  bid,  it	is  not	 possible  to  classify	 the
purchasers  whose   offers/bids	 have	been  accepted	into
`honest' purchasers  and `dishonest'  purchasers.  Everybody
whose offer or bid is accepted, is assumed to be honest.
     Secondly, in  entering into  a contract  of purchase of
the notified  estimated yield in terms of standard bags, the
discretion and	volition of  the tenderer  or bidder,  also,
plays an  important part  in calculating  the minimum  price
payable for  the estimated  yield from	the particular unit.
According to the impugned Condition 13 of the Tender Notice,
which also  forms a  part of  the prescribed  Form in  which
tenders are invited, the successful tenderer or bidder whose
tender or  bid is  accepted by	the Department, has to pay a
minimum royalty, also described as `revenue' or price, which
will be 75 per cent of the notified estimated yield in terms
of standard bag by the tenderer or bidder.
441
Thus, the  volition of	the purchaser also plays a prominent
part in fixing the rate or price payable by him. By means of
his offer  in the  Tender Form or by bidding at the auction,
the purchaser binds himself to pay this minimum royalty even
if by  the end	of the year, the number of bags collected is
less than  the notified estimated yield. The purchasers form
their own  estimates of the expected yield from a particular
unit for  a particular	year and  then make  their offers of
rates in the prescribed Tender Form, or when the disposal is
by public auction, the purchasers make their bids subject to
the terms  published in	 the Tender  or Auction Notices. If,
according to  the estimate  of an  intending purchaser,	 the
unit concerned is not likely to yield the quantity notified,
it is  open to	him either not to submit any tender or offer
or rates  at all,  or not to offer a bid or an amount higher
than  that   which,  according	 to  his   own	estimate  or
calculation, would  be a reasonable price of the bargain. In
other words,  if a  person with	 his eyes  open tenders	 the
highest rates  per standard bag or offers the highest bid at
public auction,	 as the	 case may  be, of his own accord, it
will be assumed that he did so because in his own estimation
the acceptance of the contract at those rates and subject to
the  notified	terms  and  condition  would  afford  him  a
reasonable scope  for making  profit. Furthermore, under the
scheme	of  the	 Bihar	Act  and  Rules,  the  sale  is	 not
restricted  to	 any  particular  class	 of  persons  as  in
Rashbiharis  case.  Anyone  who	 wants	to  do	business  of
purchase of  Kendu leaves  can submit his tender of rates in
the prescribed Form, or offer his bid at the auction, as the
case may  be, subject  to the  notified	 conditions  of	 the
Tender Notice/Auction Notice.
     It is  a fundamental  principle of	 general application
that if	 a person  of his  own accord, accepts a contract on
certain terms  and works  out the  contract,  he  cannot  be
allowed to  adhere to  and abide by some of the terms of the
contract which	proved advantageous to him and repudiate the
other  terms   of  the	 same  contract	  which	  might	  be
disadvantageous to  him.  The  maxim  is  qui  approbat	 non
reprobat,  (one	  who  approbates  cannot  reprobate).	This
principle, though originally borrowed from Scots Law, is now
firmly embodied	 in English  Common Law.  According to it, a
party to  an instrument or transaction cannot take advantage
of one	part of	 a document  or transaction  and reject	 the
rest. That  is to  say, no  party can  accept and reject the
same instrument or transaction (Per Scrutton L.J. Verschures
Creameries, Ltd.  v. Hull  & Netherlands  Steamship Co.; See
Douglas Menzies	 v. Umphelby;  See  also  Stroud's  Judicial
Dictionary, Vol. I, page 169, 3rd Edn.).
442
     The aforesaid  inhibitory principle squarely applies to
the cases  of those  petitioners who had by offering highest
bids at	 public auctions  or by Tenders, accepted and worked
out the	 contracts in  the past	 but are  now resisting	 the
demands	 or  other  action,  arising  out  of  the  impugned
Condition 13  on the ground that this condition is violative
of Articles  19(1)(g) and  14 of  the Constitution.  In this
connection, it will bear repetition, here, that the impugned
conditions though  bear a statutory complexion, retain their
basic contractual  character, also. It is true that a person
cannot be  debarred from enforcing his fundamental rights on
the  ground   of  estoppel  or	waiver.	 But  the  aforesaid
principle which	 prohibits a  party to	a  transaction	from
approbating, a	part of	 its conditions	 and reprobating the
rest, is different from the doctrine of estoppel or waiver).
     For  the	foregoing  reasons,  the  challenge  to	 the
impugned Condition  No. 13,  on the  ground of	Article	 14,
also, is unsustainable and is rejected.
     Now, we  take  up	the  impugned  Condition  4(bb).  It
provides that no objection from the purchaser with regard to
the quantity or quality of the leave in the gaddis (bundles)
offered would  be tenable.  This  condition  is	 couched  in
peremptory,  drastic   and  absolute  language.	 It  is	 not
qualified by  any words showing that the bar envisaged in it
will be	 attracted only in cases where the purchaser has had
an earlier opportunity to raise this objection but failed to
do so,	or, where  he had on an earlier occasion raised such
an objection  which was heard and overruled by the competent
Forest Officer.	 We have  already noticed that Section 9(1),
proviso, of  the Act  contains a built-in-warranty, that the
Kendu leaves  offered would be fit for manufacture of bidis;
that is to say, the leaves would be of merchantable quality.
Condition  4(bb)   therefore,  is   inconsistent  with	 and
repugnant to  Section 9(1), proviso of the Act and, as such,
invalid.  It  is,  therefore,  not  necessary  to  test	 its
validity on  the  ground  of  Articles	19  and	 14  of	 the
Constitution.
     In the  light of the above discussion, we would dismiss
all the	 Writ petitions, namely, Writ Petitions 2222 to 2252
of 1977,  Writ Petitions  121 to 125 of 1979, Writ Petitions
405 and	 441 of	 1974, Writ  Petitions 46  and 47  of  1975,
excepting to  this extent that the aforesaid clause 4(bb) in
the Tender  Notices and the statutory Agreement in question.
being inconsistent  with the  proviso to Section 9(1) of the
Act, is declared to be invalid.
     In Criminal  Appeal 300 of 1974, the prosecution of the
appellants for	an offence under Section 379, Penal Code has
already been quash-
443
ed by  the High	 Court by  its judgment	 dated February	 14,
1974; but  the Order  dated September  11, 1973	 of the Sub-
Divisional Magistrate,	Saheb Ganj,  taking cognizance	of a
case instituted by the Divisional Forest Officer, Dumka, for
offences under Section 409, Penal Code and Section 5(2) read
with Section 16 of the Bihar Kendu Leaves (Control of Trade)
Ordinance (46 of 1973) was not quashed.
     The main  contention of  appellant	 1,  Shankar  Prasad
Bhagat, was  that he  received only  650  standard  bags  as
against the  notified estimated 1500 bags, and the Condition
13 of the statutory Agreement under which he was required to
pay for	 the undelivered or unoffered quantity of the leaves
was unconstitutional.
     Since we  have held  that the aforesaid Condition 13 is
valid, this  contention must  fail. We,	 therefore,  dismiss
this appeal.  The  case	 shall	now  go	 back  to  the	Sub-
Divisional Magistrate  for disposal  in accordance with law.
We advisedly abstain from making any observation with regard
to the merits of the case.
N.K.A.			     Petitions and Appeal dismissed.
444



