

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Smt. Khatoon Begum Etc. Etc vs Union Of India And Ors. Etc. Etc on 9 March, 1981Equivalent citations: 1981 AIR 1077, 1981 SCR  (3) 137
Author: O C Reddy
Bench: Reddy, O. Chinnappa (J)
           PETITIONER:
SMT. KHATOON BEGUM ETC. ETC.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
UNION OF INDIA AND ORS. ETC. ETC.

DATE OF JUDGMENT09/03/1981

BENCH:
REDDY, O. CHINNAPPA (J)
BENCH:
REDDY, O. CHINNAPPA (J)
ISLAM, BAHARUL (J)

CITATION:
 1981 AIR 1077		  1981 SCR  (3) 137
 1981 SCC  (2) 480	  1981 SCALE  (1)507
 CITATOR INFO :
 R	    1981 SC1389	 (1)
 R	    1986 SC 356	 (3)


ACT:
     Constitution of  India, 1950,  Article 22(5)  - Whether
delay in  considering the  representation made	by a  detenu
vitiates the detention under the National Security Act.



HEADNOTE:
     Allowing the appeals, the Court
^
     HELD: 1:  1. Article 22 (5) of the Constitution enjoins
a duty	on the	authority making  the order  of detention to
afford the  detenu the	earliest  opportunity  of  making  a
representation against	the order.  The right and obligation
to make	 and to	 consider the representation at the earliest
opportunity is	a constitutional  imperative which cannot be
curtailed or abridged. [140 E]
     1: 2. If the Parliament or the State Legislature making
the  law   providing  for  preventive  detention  devises  a
circumlocutory procedure  for considering the representation
or if  the inter-departmental  consultative  procedures	 are
such  that   delay  becomes  inevitable,  the  law  and	 the
procedures will	 contravene the constitutional mandate. [140
F]
     1 :  3. It	 is essential  that any	 law  providing	 for
preventive detention and any authority obliged to make order
for preventive	detention should adopt procedures calculated
towards expeditious consideration of representations made by
detenus. It will be no answer to a demand for liberty to say
that administrative  red tape  makes delay  inevitable.	 The
constitutional mandate	brooks no  unreasonable delay in the
consideration of a representation. [140 G, 141A]
     1: 4.  The right  of detenu  to have his representation
considered "at	the earliest opportunity" and the obligation
of the	detaining authority  to consider  the representation
"at the	 earliest  opportunity"	 are  not  a  right  and  an
obligation flowing  from either	 the Conservation of Foreign
Exchange and Prevention of Smuggling Activities, 1974 or the
National  Security   Act  or,  for  that  matter  any  other
Parliamentary  or   State  law	 providing  for	  preventive
detention. They are a right and an obligation created by the
very Constitution which breathes life into the Parliamentary
or State law. [140 D]
     Jayanarayan Sukul v. State of West Bengal, [1970] 3 SCR
225; Narendra  Purshotam  Umrao	 etc.  v.  B.B.	 Gujral	 and
Ors.,[1979] 2  SCR 315;	 V.J. Jain  v. Pradhan,	 AIR 1979 SC
1501; Smt.  Ichhu Devi	Choraria v. Union of India and Ors.;
AIR 1980 SC 1983; Ramachandra A. Kamat v. Union of India and
Ors. [1980]  2 SCR  1072; Frances  Coralie Mullin  v. W.  C.
Khambra and Ors.. [1980] 2 SCR 1095, referred to.



JUDGMENT:
     ORIGINAL JURISDICTION:  Writ Petition  Nos. 293,391 and
392 of 1981.
	   (Under Article 32 of the Constitution)
138
     M.M.  Abdul   Khader  and	 Shakeel   Ahmed   for	 the
Petitioners.
     R.K. Bhatt, D. Goburdhan and Miss A. Subhashini for the
Respondents.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     CHINNAPPA REDDY,  J. These	 three Writ Petitions may be
disposed  of  by  a  single  judgment  since  the  principal
question argued	 in all the three cases is one. The question
is whether delay in considering the representation made by a
detenu under  Art. 22(5)  of  the  Constitution	 vitiates  a
detention under	 the National  Security Act and entitles the
detenu to be released on that ground alone. As a result of a
series of decisions of this Court,(') it is now well settled
that the representation made by a detenu under Art. 22(5) of
the   Constitution   against   his   detention	 under	 the
Conservation of Foreign Exchange and Prevention of Smuggling
Activities Act,	 1974, must  be considered  by the detaining
authority  with	  the  ut-most	 expedition  and   that	 any
unexplained delay  in considering the representation will be
fatal to the detention. The learned counsel for the State of
Uttar Pradesh  urged that  the	rule  requiring	 expeditious
consideration of  a detenu's  representation is a judge-made
rule based  on provisions  of the  Conservation	 of  Foreign
Exchange and  Prevention of  the Smuggling  Activities	Act,
1974, and  that the extension of the application of the rule
to cases  of detention	under the  National security Act was
unwarranted. The  learned counsel  contrasted the provisions
of the	National Security  Act and  the	 provisions  of	 the
Conservation of	 Foreign Exchange  & Prevention of Smuggling
Activities  Act,  1974,	 and  urged  that  in  the  case  of
detention under	 the National Security Act, a certain amount
of delay  was inevitable  having due regard to the procedure
prescribed by the Act and,
139
therefore, delay  in  consideration  of	 the  representation
should not  be allowed	to prejudice  the detention.  We are
unable to  agree with the submission of the learned counsel.
We will	 presently give	 our reasons  for our  inability  to
accept the  learned counsel's  submissions but we will first
like to refer to a few facts.
     In Writ  Petition (Criminal)  No. 293 of 1981 the order
and the	 grounds of  detention were  served on the detenu on
October 30,  1980 and  November 12,  1980 respectively.	 The
detenu made  a representation  on November  12, 1980. Though
according to  the detenu  he has  received no  communication
from the Government about his representation, the Additional
District Magistrate has stated in his counter-affidavit that
the representation was rejected on December 9, 1980 and that
it was communicated to the detenu through the Superintendent
of the	Central Jail.  The counter-affidavit  mentions not a
word to explain the delay in considering the representation.
The only  reference to	the representation  in the  counter-
affidavit is  in these	two sentences:	"It is admitted that
the detenu  made a  representation to  the Home Secretary on
November 12,  1980, and the same was rejected on December 9,
1980. The  rejection of	 the representation was communicated
to the	detenu through	Superintendent, Central	 Jail by the
Government".
     Similarly in  Writ Petition  (Criminal No. 391 of 1981,
the order  and the  grounds of	detention were served on the
detenu on November 12, 1980. The representation was rejected
on December  10, 1980. In the counter affidavit filed by the
Section Officer,  Confidential Department, of the Government
of Uttar  Pradesh, it  is stated  that	on  receipt  of	 the
representation, the Secretary' Home Department, forwarded it
to the	District Magistrate  for his  comments. In  order to
meet the  allegations in  the representation,  the  District
Magistrate had	to gather  information from many sources and
the representation  alongwith his  comments was	 returned to
the Home  Secretary by	the District  Magistrate on November
25, 1980.  Thereafter Law  Department was  consulted and the
file could reach the Home Minister on December 5, 1980 only.
The representation  was rejected  by the  Home	Minister  on
December 8, 1980 and then communicated to the detenu through
the Superintendent, Central Jail.
     In Writ  Petition (Criminal)  No. 392 of 1981 the order
and the	 grounds of  detention were  served on the detenu on
October 16,  1980.  The	 detenu	 made  a  representation  on
October 24,  1980. It was rejected on November 25, 1980. The
counter-
140
affidavit filed	 by the	 Additional District Magistrate does
not offer any explanation for the delay in the consideration
of the	representation. He  has satisfied  himself with	 the
statement "as  regards the  representation of  the detenu to
the Home Secretary this fact is admitted."
     The question  for consideration  is  whether  a  person
preventively detained  under the  provisions of the National
Security Act is entitled to be released if there is delay in
the consideration  of the  representation made by him to the
detaining authority.  It is  true that	the series  of cases
where delay  in the consideration of the representation made
by a  detenu was  held to  be fatal  to detention were cases
which arose  under the	Conservation of Foreign Exchange and
Prevention  of	 Smuggling  Activities	Act,  1974.  We	 are
however, unable to see how that would make any difference.
     The  right	  of  detenu   to  have	 his  representation
considered "at	the earlier  opportunity" and the obligation
of the	detaining authority  to consider  the representation
"at the	 earliest  opportunity"	 are  not  a  right  and  an
obligation flowing  from either	 the Conservation of Foreign
Exchange and Prevention of Smuggling Activities Act 1974, or
the National  Security Act  or, for  that matter  any  other
Parliamentary  of   State  law	 providing  for	  preventive
detention. They are a right and an obligation created by the
very Constitution which breathes life into the Parliamentary
or State  law. Art.  22(5) enjoins  a duty  on the authority
making the  order of  detention to  afford the	detenu	"the
earliest opportunity  of making a representation against the
order". The right and obligation to make and to consider the
representation	 at    the   earliest	opportunity   is   a
Constitutional	imperative  which  cannot  be  curtailed  or
abridged. If  the Parliament or the State legislature making
the  law   providing  for  preventive  detention  devises  a
circumlocutory procedure  for considering the representation
or if  the inter-departmental  consultative  procedures	 are
such  that   delay  becomes  inevitable,  the  law  and	 the
procedures will contravene the constitutional mandate. It is
essential that	any law	 providing for	preventive detention
and any	 authority obliged  to make  orders  for  preventive
detention  should   adopt  procedures	calculated   towards
expeditious  consideration   of	 representations   made	  by
detenus. It will be no answer to a demand for liberty to say
that administrative  red tape  makes delay  inevitable.	 The
learned counsel	 for the  State of Uttar Pradesh pointed out
certain differences  between  the  Conservation	 of  Foreign
Exchange and  Prevention of Smuggling Activities Act and the
National Security  Act which  according to  him	 make  delay
inevitable in
141
the consideration  of representations  in cases of detention
under  the   National  Security	  Act.	We  think  that	 the
differences pointed  out are  irrelevant. The constitutional
mandate brooks no unreasonable delay in the consideration of
a representation.  In the  cases before us, in Criminal Writ
Petition Nos. 293 of 1981 and 392 of 1981 no explanation was
offered by  the detaining  authority for  the delay  in	 the
consideration  of   representations  and  in  Criminal	Writ
Petition No.  391 of  1981, administrative  red tape was the
only explanation  offered. We  are satisfied that in all the
three  cases   there   was   unreasonable   delay   in	 the
consideration of  the representations  and the	detenus are,
therefore, entitled  to be  released. They  will be released
forthwith. The Writ Petitions are allowed.
V.D.K.					  Petition allowed
142




