

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Shiv Prasad Bhatnagar vs State Of Madhya Pradesh & Anr on 5 March, 1981Equivalent citations: 1981 AIR  870, 1981 SCR  (3)	 81
Author: O C Reddy
Bench: Reddy, O. Chinnappa (J)
           PETITIONER:
SHIV PRASAD BHATNAGAR

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH & ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT05/03/1981

BENCH:
REDDY, O. CHINNAPPA (J)
BENCH:
REDDY, O. CHINNAPPA (J)
ISLAM, BAHARUL (J)

CITATION:
 1981 AIR  870		  1981 SCR  (3)	 81
 1981 SCC  (2) 456	  1981 SCALE  (1)592
 CITATOR INFO :
 R	    1984 SC 211	 (7)


ACT:
     National Security Act-Section 12 (1)-Scope of-Staleness
and irrelevance of grounds of detention-If would vitiate the
order of detention.



HEADNOTE:
     The petitioner was detained under section 12 (1) of the
National Security  Act on the grounds that he, alongwith his
friends, in  the second	 week of  November, 1980 indulged in
filthy	abuse	of  Muslims,   threatened  their  lives	 and
performed  "marpeet"   and  that   he  and   his  associates
terrorised the	common man  in the  area  by  their  various
criminal acts  which caused  disturbance to the public peace
and public safety.
     In support	 of the	 petition it was contended on behalf
of the	petitioner that	 the reference to associates without
naming even  one rendered  the ground  vague and, therefore,
vitiated the  order of	detention and (2) that the incidents
enumerated in  the second  ground related to the years 1974,
1975, 1977  and 1978 which could not be said to be proximate
enough to sustain the order of detention.
     Allowing the petition,
^
     HELD: The detenu is entitled to be released.
     It is  now well  settled that grounds of detention must
be pertinent  and not  irrelevant, proximate  and not state,
precise and  not vague. Irrelevance, staleness and vagueness
are vices  any single  one of which is sufficient to vitiate
the order of detention. [83 D]
     In	 the   instant	case  the  incidents  enumerated  to
substantiate the second ground show that apart from the vice
of staleness  from which  they suffer,	they were related to
"law and  order" and not to the maintenance of public order.
They are  stale because	 of the	 passage of  time since	 the
happening of  some of  the incidents;  they  are  irrelevant
because they related to law and order and not to maintenance
of public order. [83 E]
     In Re:  Sushanta Goswami  and Ors., [1969] 3 S.C.R. 138
followed.



JUDGMENT:
     ORIGINAL JURISDICTION: Writ Petition No. 397 of 1981.
	   (Under Article 32 of the Constitution)
     Mrs. Shyamala  Pappu, M.  S. Mann,	 S Shukhar, Miss Raj
Shree and Mrs. Indra Sawhney for the Petitioner.
     S. K. Gambhir and Vijay Hansaria for the Respondent.
82
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     CHINNAPPA REDDY  J.  Shiv	Prasad	Bhatnagar  is  under
preventive detention  pursuant	to  an	order  made  by	 the
District Magistrate,  Vidisha, Madhya Pradesh. The order and
the grounds  of detention were served on him on November 28,
1980. The  District Magistrate made a report of the order to
the State  Government and  the latter approved the detention
order on  December 2, 1980. The approval was communicated to
the  detenu  on	 December  5,  1980.  A	 representation	 was
submitted by  the detenu  on December 13, 1980. The Advisory
Board constituted  by the State Government met on January 3,
1981, considered  the  material	 placed	 before	 it  by	 the
detaining authority  as well  as the  representation and the
written arguments  submitted by	 the detenu.  The detenu was
also given  a personal hearing. The Advisory Board submitted
its report  to the  State Government  on  January  4,  1981.
Thereafter the	State  Government  confirmed  the  order  of
detention on  February 3,  1981 under  Sec. 12	(1)  of	 the
National  Security   Act.  The	 period	 of   detention	 was
stipulated as  one year	 from  the  date  of  the  order  of
detention.  The	  order	  confirming   the   detention	 was
communicated to	 the detenu  on February 12, 1981 and he was
also informed  that the Advisory Board had opined that there
was sufficient cause for his detention.
     Smt. Shyamla Pappu, learned counsel for the detenu made
a number  of submissions.  In the view that we are taking of
one of the primary submissions, we do not think it necessary
to  consider  the  rest	 of  the  submissions.	The  primary
submission that	 we have  in mind  is that  the	 grounds  of
detention suffer  from	the  vice  of  either  vagueness  or
staleness.  The	  first	 ground	 mentions  that	 the  detenu
alongwith his friends, in the second week of November, 1980,
indulged in  filthy abuse of Muslims, threatened their lives
and performed "mar pit''. Details of incidents were given to
substantiate the  ground. As  many  as	six  incidents	were
mentioned and  in everyone  of them  it was  said  that	 the
detenu alongwith his associates had indulged in this or that
violent action.	 No mention  was made  of the name of even a
single associate.  The argument	 was that  the reference  to
'associates' without  naming even  one rendered	 the  ground
vague and,  therefore, vitiated	 it. Similarly,	 it was said
the second  ground also	 referred  to  the  detenu  and	 his
accociates without  naming even	 a single  associate and for
that reason  the second	 ground also  was vague. The further
submission was	that  the  incidents  enumerated  in  second
ground were of the years 1974, 1975, 1977 and 1978 and could
by no means be said to be proximate
83
enough to  sustain an  order of	 preventive  detention.	 The
second ground  was to  the effect  that the  detenu and	 his
associates had terrorized the common man in the Vidisha area
by their  various criminal  acts which caused disturbance to
public peace  and  public  safety.  Several  incidents	were
narrated to substantiate this ground. The first incident was
of the	year 1974, the second incident was of the year 1975,
the next  three incidents were of the year 1977 and the rest
of the incidents barring the last one were of the year 1978.
A perusal  of the  incidents enumerated	 to substantiate the
second ground  show that  apart from  the vice	of staleness
from which  they appear to suffer, the incidents are related
to "law	 and order"  and not  to the  maintenance of  public
order. The  incidents appear  to bear a striking resemblance
to the	grounds of  detention which  were considered  In Re:
Sushanta Goswami  & Ors.,  (1) particularly  in the cases of
Debendra Nath  Das,  Abdul  Wahab,  Anil  Das,	Dilip  Kumar
Chakraborty and	 Ashoka Kumar  Mukherjee.  It  is  now	well
settled that  grounds of detention must be pertinent and not
irrelevant, proximate  and not stale, precise and not vague.
Irrelevance, staleness	and vagueness  are vices  any single
one of which is sufficient to vitiate a ground of detention.
And, a	single vicious	ground is  sufficient to  vitiate an
order of  detention. In	 the present  case we  are satisfied
that the  second ground	 of detention  suffers both from the
vice of	 staleness, because of the passage of time since the
happening  of	some  of  the  incidents  and  the  vice  of
irrelevance because  they relate  to 'law and order' and not
to 'the maintenance of public order'. The detenu is entitled
to be released. He is directed to be released forthwith. The
petition is allowed.
P.B.R.					    Petition allowed
84




