

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Ram Manorath vs State Of U.P on 10 March, 1981Equivalent citations: 1981 SCR  (3) 195, 1981 SCC  (2) 654
Author: Y Chandrachud
Bench: Chandrachud, Y.V. ((Cj)
           PETITIONER:
RAM MANORATH

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF U.P.

DATE OF JUDGMENT10/03/1981

BENCH:
CHANDRACHUD, Y.V. ((CJ)
BENCH:
CHANDRACHUD, Y.V. ((CJ)
SEN, A.P. (J)

CITATION:
 1981 SCR  (3) 195	  1981 SCC  (2) 654
 1981 SCALE  (1)527


ACT:
     Indian  Penal   Code  1860,  Ss.  302  and	 149-Murders
committed by  members of  an unlawful  assembly-Acquittal of
some-Effect on	prosecution of	remaining-Death sentence for
two and life sentence for others-Propriety of.



HEADNOTE:
     Out of  twelve persons, charged with the offences under
section 302  read with	section 149 I.P.C. and various other
charges, eight	were convicted.	 Two of	 them, C  and R were
sentenced to  death  while  the	 others	 were  sentenced  to
imprisonment for  life. The  High  Court  upheld  the  death
sentence of  two accused,  acquitted one  and confirmed	 the
conviction of others.
     The case  of the prosecution was that on the day of the
occurrence at  about sun-set C shot dead two of the deceased
while two  others were	shot by R. The prosecution relied on
the dying  declaration of  one of  the deceased and examined
four eye witnesses.
     In appeals	 to this Court it was contended on behalf of
the appellants	that the  fact that  the trial court did not
find  it   safe	 to  accept  the  prosecution  evidence	 and
acquitted five out of twelve persons mentioned in the F.I.R.
at one	stage or  the other  should be sufficient to discard
the prosecution	 case in  respect of  the other	 accused  as
well.
     Allowing the appeals in part,
^
     HELD: 1(i).  It is difficult to hold that the witnesses
had made  out an  entirely false  or concocted story against
the appellants.	 The circumstance  that three  of  the	four
prosecution witnesses  had been injured during the course of
the incident affords a strong guarantee of their presence at
the scene of the occurrence. There is also no reason why the
four eye  witnesses should falsely implicate persons against
whom they had no grouse. [197 F-G]
     (ii). The reason why the trial court and the High Court
acquitted some	of the	accused was that in the case of some
of them	 there was a possibility of mistaken identity while,
in regard  to some  others, the	 evidence was  not of such a
nature or  character as	 to justify  the acceptance of their
complexity beyond a reasonable doubt. [197 H]
     2. One  of the  accused J	must be	 acquitted  for	 the
reason that  though his	 name was  mentioned  alongwith	 the
names  of   eleven  others   at	 the  outset  of  the  First
Information  Report,  the  text	 of  that  report  does	 not
attribute any part to him at all. His name had been included
in an  omnibus manner,	by saying  that he along with others
wielded his lathi. [198 C-D]
196
     3. It  is unsafe  to sentence  C and R to death. One of
the deceased  implicated R  in his  dying declaration as the
person, who  shot at  him but  as pointed  out by  the Trial
Court itself,  the dying  declaration suffers  from  several
infirmities and, it cannot therefore, be relied upon for the
purposes of  holding that  it was this accused, who shot the
deceased. Secondly,  the occurrence took place an hour after
sun-set and it is hardly likely that if a large group of ten
or twelve  persons had	formed	an  unlawful  assembly,	 the
witnesses would	 be in a position to identify minute details
of the	incident.  The	prosecution  version  in  regard  to
specific overt	acts that  C and  R fired shots resulting in
the fatal injuries to the two deceased seems exaggerated. No
distinction can	 be made  in the  case of the other accused,
who have been sentenced to life imprisonment and the case of
these two accused. The sentence of death imposed on them is,
therefore, set aside. They are sentenced to imprisonment for
life. [198 E-G, 199 B-D]
     4.	 The   conviction  and	sentence  of  the  remaining
appellants are confirmed. [199 E]



JUDGMENT:
     CRIMINAL APPELLATE	 JURISDICTION : Criminal Appeal Nos.
345 & 346 of 1978.
     Appeals by	 special leave	from the  Judgment and Order
dated 14.1.1978	 of the Allahabad High Court (Lucknow Bench)
in Criminal Appeals Nos. 496, 508 and 542 of 1977.
     Frank Anthony and Sushil Kumar for the Appellant.
     H.R. Bhardwaj,  G. S, Narayanan and R. K. Bhatt for the
Respondent.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     CHANDRACHUD, C. J. Twelve persons were put up for trial
before the  learned Additional	Sessions Judge,	 Bahraich on
various charges,  the principal	 charge being  under section
302 read  with section	149 of	the Penal  Code. The learned
Judge acquitted	 four persons  and convicted  the  remaining
eight of the offences of which they were charged. Two out of
those eight  persons namely,  Chhotey and  Ram Manorath were
sentenced to death while the remaining six were sentenced to
imprisonment for  life. The  sentences awarded for the other
offences  were	 directed  to  run  concurrently  with	that
sentence. The  High Court  of Allahabad	 acquitted one	more
person and  convicted the  remaining seven.  The High  Court
also upheld  the death	sentence awarded  to Chhotey and Ram
Manorath. From	out of	the seven  persons convicted  by the
High Court,  only six  are before  us  since  one  of  them,
Baijnath, who was awarded life imprisonment has not appealed
from the judgment of the High Court.
197
     The incident  out of which these proceedings arise took
place at  about sunset time on December 5, 1973 in a village
called Bhawanipur.  Four persons  died during  the course of
that incident,	namely,	 Guley,	 Abbas,	 Wali  Mohammad	 and
Nankau. Guley  and Abbas  are alleged to have been shot dead
by Chhotey while the other two are alleged to have been shot
by Ram	Manorath.  Guley  and  Abbas  died  instantaneously,
Nankau a little later and Wali Mohammad about a week later.
     In support	 of its	 case the  prosecution examined four
eye witnesses: Noor Mohammad, P. W. 1, Shaukat Ali, P. W. 2,
Nafees, P.  W. 4  and Naeem,  P. W.  5. The prosecution also
relied on  the dying  declaration of Wali Mohammad which was
recorded  by  a	 Magistrate.  The  evidence  of	 these	four
witnesses as  also the	dying declaration have been accepted
by both the Courts.
     Shri Frank	 Anthony, who  appears on behalf of five out
of the	six appellants before us, has drawn our attention to
various circumstances  which according	to  him	 render	 the
entire prosecution  case suspect  and  unacceptable.  It  is
urged by  the learned counsel that a large number of persons
were roped  in on  mere suspicion which is shown by the very
fact that  five out  of the 12 persons who were mentioned in
the First  Information Report were acquitted at one stage or
the other for the reason that it would not be safe to accept
the evidence  led by  the prosecution against those persons.
The same  test, according to the learned counsel, must apply
to  the	  cases	 of   the  remaining  accused  also.  Having
considered this submission and the other submissions made by
the learned  counsel, we  find it difficult to hold that the
witnesses have	made out an entirely false or concocted case
against all  the appellants.  Out of  the four eye witnesses
examined by  the prosecution, Noor Mohammad, Shaukat Ali and
Nafees were  indisputably injured  during the  course of the
incident in  question and that circumstance affords a strong
guarantee of their presence at the scene of offence. Counsel
himself urged  that there  was no motive for the offence. If
that be	 so, we	 are unable  to understand  why the four eye
witnesses should falsely implicate persons against whom they
have no	 grouse. The reason for the acquittal of some of the
accused by  the Trial Court and the High Court is that there
was, in	 the case of some of them, a possibility of mistaken
identity while,	 in regard  to some others, the evidence was
not of	such  a	 nature	 or  character	as  to	justify	 the
acceptance of  their complicity	 beyond a  reasonable doubt.
The injuries  received by  Shaukat Ali,	 P. W.	2 are  quite
serious. P.W. 4,
198
Nafees was  not concerned  with the  incident in  any  other
manner because	he was	engaged as  a mere  labourer by	 the
deceased, Wali	Mohammad. In  so far  as the  remaining	 two
witnesses namely,  P.W.1 and 5 are concerned, their presence
was virtually  admitted on  behalf of  the principal accused
Baijnath who has not chosen to file any appeal before us.
     Though this is the true position, we do not consider it
proper to  accept wholly the evidence led by the prosecution
without examining  the case  of each  one of the accused. In
that process  we find  that the appellant Jaisee ought to be
acquitted. It  is undoubtedly  true  as	 contended  by	Shri
Bhardwaj, who  appears on  behalf  of  the  State  of  Uttar
Pradesh, that  Jaisee's name  is mentioned in the F.I.R. and
that he	 has been  implicated by  all the  four	 prosecution
witnesses. But the difficulty which we find in accepting the
case of	 the prosecution against this accused is that though
his name  is mentioned	along with the names of eleven other
persons at  the outset	of the First Information Report, the
text of	 that report  does not	attribute any part to him at
all. His name has been included in the text of the report in
an omnibus  manner by  saying that  he, along  with  others,
apart from  Chhotey and	 Ram Manorath  who were	 armed	with
guns, wielded his lathi.
     There is  one more	 aspect of  the matter	which merits
serious attention,  and that  is whether  the death sentence
imposed on  Chhotey and	 Ram  Manorath	must  be  confirmed.
Having given  our anxious  consideration to  this  question,
especially since four persons were done to death, we find it
unsafe to  sentence these two accused to the extreme penalty
of law.	 In so	far as	Ram Manorath  is  concerned,  he  is
alleged to  have shot  at Wali	Mohammad  and  Nankau.	Wali
Mohammad  has	implicated  Ram	  Manorath  in	 his   dying
declaration as	the person  who shot at him but, Shri Sushil
Kumar, who  appears for	 Ram Manorath,	has  very  tellingly
demonstrated how  unsafe it  will be  to  accept  the  dying
declaration. The learned Trial Judge has himself pointed out
in paragraph  104 of  his judgment  the various	 infirmities
from which the dying declaration suffers. We are quite clear
that the  learned counsel  is right  in cautioning the Court
against	 the  acceptance  of  the  dying  declaration  which
suffers from the infirmities pointed out by the Trial Court.
We cannot,  therefore, rely on the dying declaration for the
purpose of holding that it was Ram Manorath who shot at Wali
Mohammad. But  then Shri  Bhardwaj relies on the evidence of
the four  witnesses and contends that the part played by Ram
Manorath is established on
199
that evidence.	On that	 aspect of  the matter,	 we  have  a
serious difficulty  in	accepting  as  its  face  value	 the
evidence of  these witnesses in so far as they say that they
saw Chhotey  and Ram  Manorath firing shots at Guley, Abbas,
Wali Mohammad  and Nankau.  It	may  be	 recalled  that	 the
incident occurred  on December 5, 1973 and the almanac shows
that the  time of  the sunset  on that day was 5.13 p.m. The
incident happened  nearly an hour after the sunset and it is
hardly likely that if a large group of ten or twelve persons
had formed an unlawful assembly, the witnesses would be in a
position to  identify minute  details of the incident. There
is not	the slightest  doubt that the four persons, who died
during the  course of the incident in question, were done to
death by  persons who were members of the unlawful assembly,
some of	 whom have been convicted by the trial court and the
High Court.  But we  are unable	 to accept  the	 prosecution
version which,	in  regard  to	specific  overt	 acts  seems
exaggerated, that  Chhotey and	Ram Manorath fired the shots
which resulted	in the	fatal injuries.	 No distinction can,
therefore, be  made in	the cases  of the  other persons who
have been  sentenced to	 life imprisonment  and the cases of
these two  persons. We	must, therefore, set aside the death
sentence imposed upon them.
     The result	 is that the appeals are partly allowed. The
appellant Jaisee  is acquitted	of all the offences of which
he was	charged and  he shall  be released  so	far  is	 the
present case  is concerned.  The  conviction  of  appellants
Chhotey	 and  Ram  Manorath  for  the  various	offences  is
confirmed but the sentence of death imposed upon them is set
aside. We  sentence  them  to  imprisonment  for  life.	 The
conviction and	sentence of  the  remaining  appellants	 are
confirmed.
N.V.K.				     Appeals partly allowed.
200




