

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Gokul Parashram Patil vs State Of Maharashtra on 4 May, 1981Equivalent citations: 1981 AIR 1441, 1981 SCR  (3) 658
Author: A Koshal
Bench: Koshal, A.D.
           PETITIONER:
GOKUL PARASHRAM PATIL

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF MAHARASHTRA

DATE OF JUDGMENT04/05/1981

BENCH:
KOSHAL, A.D.
BENCH:
KOSHAL, A.D.
ISLAM, BAHARUL (J)

CITATION:
 1981 AIR 1441		  1981 SCR  (3) 658
 1981 SCC  (3) 331


ACT:
     Conviction under s. 302 Penal Code based on sole injury
on non-vital  part-If injury caused by the assailant was not
intended to  cause death  clause thirdly  of s.30 Penal Code
will not be attracted and the conviction and sentence should
be under Part II of section 304 Penal Code.



HEADNOTE:
     The appellant attacked one Anta with a knife giving the
latter a single blow above the left clavicle where it caused
a muscle-deep  incised wound  having the dimensions 1-1/4" x
1/3". The autopsy surgeon, while certifying the existence of
that wound,  also found	 that the superior venacava had been
cut, the  damage so  caused being sufficient in the ordinary
course	of   nature  to	 cause	death.	The  sessions  court
convicted the  appellant of  an offence under section 302 of
the Penal  Code and  sentenced him to imprisonment for life.
The High  Court confirmed the conviction and the sentence in
appeal. Hence, the appeal by special leave.
     Allowing  the   appeal  in	  part	and  substituting  a
conviction under Part II of section 304 and sentence of five
years' rigorous imprisonment, the Court.
^
     HELD :  1. To  attract clause thirdly of section 300 of
the Penal  Code and  also illustration	(c) appended thereto
the injury  in question needs satisfy only two tests-namely,
(a) the	 injury must be sufficient in the ordinary course of
nature to  cause death	and (b)	 such injury  must have been
intended to have been caused by the culprit. [66 A-B]
     2. In  the present case, the solitary blow given by the
appellant to  the deceased  was on  the left clavicle a non-
vital part-and the appellant cannot be said to know that the
superior venacava  would be  cut as  a result of that wound.
Even a	medical man  perhaps may not have been able to judge
the location  of the superior venacava with any precision of
that  type.  The  fact	that  the  venacava  was  cut  must,
therefore, be  ascribed to  a non-intentional  or accidental
circumstance. Therefore,  it cannot  by said  to  have	been
intended by the appellant. [660 A-C]
     Visa Singh	 v. State  of Punjab,  A.I.R. 1958 S.C. 465,
referred to.
659
     Harjinder Singh  v. Delhi	Administration, A.I.R.	1968
S.C.  867   and	 Laxman	  Kalu	Nikalje	  v.  The  State  of
Maharashtra, A.I.R. 1968 S.C. 1390, followed.



JUDGMENT:
     CRIMINAL APPELLATE	 JURISDICTION :	 Criminal Appeal No.
512 of 1981.
     Appeal by	special leave  from the	 judgment and  order
dated the  8th September,  1980 of  the Bombay High Court in
Criminal Appeal No. 664 of 1980.
     V.N. Ganpule,  A.B. Lal  and Mrs.	V.D. Khanna  for the
Petitioner.
     O.P. Rana and R.N. Poddar for the Respondent.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     KOSHAL, J.	 The appellant	has  been  convicted  of  an
offence	 under	 section  302	of  the	 Indian	 Penal	Code
(hereinafter referred  to as the Code) for causing the death
of one	Anita, and  has been  sentenced to  imprisonment for
life by	 the trial  court as  well as  in appeal by the High
Court.
     2. The  case of  the prosecution was that the appellant
attacked the  deceased with  a knife  giving  the  latter  a
single blow  above the	left  clavicle	where  it  caused  a
muscle-deep incised  wound having  the	dimension  1-1/4"  x
1/3". The autopsy surgeon, while certifying the existence of
that wound,  also found	 that the superior venacava had been
cut, the  damage so  caused being sufficient in the ordinary
course of nature to cause death.
     3. The  learned counsel for the appellant has contended
that the  case does not fall within the ambit of section 302
of the	Code and  that the two courts below erred in relying
on Virsa Singh v. State of Punjab. The gist of the dictum of
this Court in that case is that if an injury is held to have
been intended  by the  assailant and  is further found to be
sufficient in  the ordinary course of nature to cause death,
it would  attract clause  thirdly of section 300 of the Code
and  that,   therefore,	 its   author  would  be  liable  to
punishment under  section 302  thereof. The question thus is
whether the
660
particular injury  which was  found to	be sufficient in the
ordinary course	 of nature  to cause  death, in	 the present
case, was an injury intended by the appellant. Our answer to
the question  is an  emphatic no. The solitary blow given by
the appellant  to the  deceased was on the left clavicle - a
non-vital part	- and  it would	 be too much to say that the
appellant knew	that the superior venacava would be cut as a
result of  that wound.	Even a	medical man  perhaps may not
have been  able	 to  judge  the	 location  of  the  superior
venacava with  any precision of that type. The fact that the
venacava was  cut must,	 therefore, be	ascribed to  a	non-
intentional or	accidental circumstance.  This was precisely
the view  taken in  Harjinder Singh v. Delhi Administration,
by Sikri,  J., and  in Laxman  Kalu Nikalje  v. The State of
Maharashtra, by	 Hidayatullah, C.J.  In the  former of these
cases, the  injury in  question was a stab wound on the left
thigh which  had cut  the femoral artery and vessels. In the
latter,	 the  damage  caused  consisted	 of  a	cut  in	 the
auxiliary artery  and veins. In each of the two cases it was
held  that  although  the  injury  which  was  found  to  be
sufficient in  the ordinary  course of nature to cause death
had resulted from a blow with a sharp-edged weapon, the same
could not  be said  to have  been intended,  that  the	only
injury which  could  be	 regarded  as  intentional  was	 the
superficial wound resulting directly from the blow, that the
assailant could	 not be	 held guilty  of  an  offence  under
section 302  of the Code and that he was, on the other hand,
guilty of  a lesser offence falling under part II of section
304 thereof.
     4. Mr.  Rana, learned  counsel for	 the State has drawn
our attention to illustration (c) appended to section 300 of
the Code  and has  contended on	 the basis  thereof that the
culpable act attributed to the appellant is covered thereby.
The illustration may be extracted :
     "(c) A intentionally  gives Z a sword-cut or club-wound
	  sufficient to	 cause the  death of  a man  in	 the
	  ordinary course  of nature. Z dies in consequence.
	  Here A  is guilty  of murder,	 although he may not
	  have intended to cause Z's death'.
661
     The proposition  propounded by  Mr. Rana  is  that	 the
illustration, which is obviously relatable to clause thirdly
of the	section, postulates that the injury in question need
satisfy only  two tests	 to attract  the provisions  of that
clause and that those tests are:
     (i)  The injury  must by  sufficient  in  the  ordinary
	  course of nature to cause death.
     (ii) Such	injury must  have been intended to have been
	  caused by the culprit.
     There is  no quarrel with this proposition but then the
injury which  was found	 to be	sufficient in  the  ordinary
course of nature to cause death in the present case does not
satisfy test (ii) because, as already pointed out, it cannot
be  said  to  have  been  intended  by	the  appellant.	 The
illustration, therefore,  does not  advance the cause of the
State.
     5. Following  the dicta in the two earlier decisions of
this Court  which have been cited above, we partially accept
the appeal, set aside the conviction of the appellant for an
offence under section 302 of the Code and substitute thereof
one under  part II of section 304 thereof. In consequence he
shall  suffer	rigorous  imprisonment	for  5	years  which
punishment, in our opinion, will meet the ends of justice in
the circumstances  of the  case. The  judgment of  the	High
Court is modified accordingly.
S.R.				      Appeal partly allowed.
662




