

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Annapurna Biscuit Manufacturing ... vs Commissioner Of Sales Tax, U.P., ... on 28 July, 1981Equivalent citations: 1981 AIR 1656, 1982 SCR  (1) 149
Author: E Venkataramiah
Bench: Venkataramiah, E.S. (J)
           PETITIONER:
ANNAPURNA BISCUIT MANUFACTURING CO., KANPUR

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
COMMISSIONER OF SALES TAX, U.P., LUCKNOW

DATE OF JUDGMENT28/07/1981

BENCH:
VENKATARAMIAH, E.S. (J)
BENCH:
VENKATARAMIAH, E.S. (J)
PATHAK, R.S.
ERADI, V. BALAKRISHNA (J)

CITATION:
 1981 AIR 1656		  1982 SCR  (1) 149
 1981 SCC  (3) 542	  1981 SCALE  (3)1101


ACT:
     U.P.  Sales   Tax	Act,  1948  (Act  XV  of  1948)	 and
Notification dated 6th October, 1971 issued under section 3-
A (2) of the Act providing for lower rate of Sales Tax at 2%
of the	turnover of "Pakaya Hua Bhojan" (cooked food)- Words
and phrases-Whether "biscuits" fall under "cooked food".



HEADNOTE:
     Dismissing the appeal, the Court
^
     HELD:  1.	 In  the   context  and	 background  of	 the
notification "biscuit"	cannot be  treated as "cooked food".
In   the    Hindi   text   of	the   notification,   issued
contemporaneously  with	  the  English	version,  the  words
(cooked food)  were used  as the equivalent for cooked food.
Ordinarily biscuit  is not  understood as "cooked food". Nor
any one	 asking for  some "cooked  food" in  a hotel will be
served with  "biscuits" in  Uttar Pradesh. The item has been
correctly treated as "unclassified commodity" and tax levied
accordingly. [151F,G,H]
     Commissioner of  Sales Tax	 v. Jassu Ram Bakery Dealer,
38 S.T.C.  461; Commissioner  of Sales Tax Madhya Pradesh v.
Shri Bailabhdas Iswardas, 21 S.T.C. 309, approved.
     2. It  is a  well settled rule of construction that the
words used  in a  law imposing	a tax should be construed in
the same  way in  which	 they  are  understood	in  ordinary
parlance in  the area  in which	 the law  is in force. If an
expression is capable of a wider meaning as well as narrower
meaning the  question whether  the  wider  or  the  narrower
meaning should	be given  depends on  the  context  and	 the
background of the case. [151 C-E]
     Hinde  v.	Allmond,  87  L.J.  K.B.  893,	quoted	with
approval.



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 3133 of
1979
     Appeal by	special leave  from the	 judgment and  order
dated the  30th July,  1979 of	the Allahabad  High Court in
Sales Tax Revision No. 573 of 1979.
150
     G.L. Sanghi,  Bharat Ji  Aggarwal, Naresh	Kumar Sharma
and Vineet Kumar for the appellant.
     S.C. Manchanda and Mrs. Sobha Dixit for the respondent.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     VENKATARAMIAH, J.	The short point for consideration in
this appeal  is whether the expression 'cooked food' used in
certain notifications  issued under  the U.P. Sales Tax Act,
1948 (U.P.  Act XV of 1948) (hereinafter referred to as 'the
Act') can  be construed	 as  including	within	its  meaning
'biscuits' also.
     The assessee,  the appellant  herein, is  a  registered
firm engaged  in the  business of  manufacture and  sale  of
biscuits intended  for human  consumption. The assessee is a
registered dealer  under  the  Act.  During  the  assessment
proceedings under  the Act for the year 1972-73 the assessee
claimed that the turn-over relating to biscuits manufactured
and sold  by it	 amounting to Rs. 35,09,920.38 P. was liable
to be taxed at two per cent which was the rate prescribed by
a notification	issued by  the State  Government for  cooked
food contending that 'cooked food' included 'biscuits' also.
The notification relied on was one issued on October 6, 1971
under  subsection   (2)	 of   section  3-A  of	the  Act  in
supersession of	 an earlier notification dated July 1, 1969.
In both	 the notifications the tax was fixed at two per cent
of the	turn-over payable  at all points of sale in the case
of cooked  food. The Assistant Commissioner (Tax Assessment)
Sales Tax,  Kanpur who	was the assessing authority rejected
the contention	of the	assessee that  cooked food  included
biscuits also  and imposed  tax at  the rate  of three and a
half per cent on the turn-over relating to biscuits treating
the same  as an	 unclassified  commodity.  An  appeal  filed
against the  order of  the assessing  authority	 before	 the
Deputy Commissioner  Sales Tax	and a  further appeal before
the Judge (Appeal) Sales Tax, Lucknow were unsuccessful. The
High Court  of Allahabad also declined to interfere with the
said order.  This appeal  by special  leave is filed against
the order  of the  High	 Court	under  Article	136  of	 the
Constitution.
     The only ground urged before us is that biscuits should
have been  treated by  the authorities	under the Act and by
the High Court as cooked food and sales tax should have been
levied on the turnover of biscuits at the rate prescribed in
respect of  cooked food	 under the  notification referred to
above. The argument urged on
151
behalf of  the appellant  is that biscuit which was consumed
by human  being for  nourishment is  food and  since  it  is
prepared by  baking which  is a	 kind of  cooking process it
should be  treated as  cooked food.  Relying on some foreign
English dictionaries  it is  contended	that  cooking  means
preparation of	food by	 application of	 heat as by boiling,
baking, roasting, broiling etc. and biscuit should therefore
be treated  as cooked  food. What is of significance in this
case is	 that the  Hindi version  of the notification issued
uses the  expression cooked  food (pakaya  hua	bhojan)	 for
'cooked food' found in the notification in English language.
     It is  a well  settled rule  of construction  that	 the
words used  in a  law imposing	a tax should be construed in
the same  way in  which	 they  are  understood	in  ordinary
parlance in  the area  in which	 the law  is in force. If an
expression is capable of a wider meaning as well as narrower
meaning the  question whether  the  wider  or  the  narrower
meaning should	be given  depends on  the  context  and	 the
background of the case. In Hinde v. Allmond the question was
whether tea  was an  "article of food" within the meaning of
an Order  designed to  prohibit the  hoarding of food namely
Food Hoarding  Order of 1917. The learned judges held it was
not even  though in some other decisions it had been held to
be an "article of food". Shearman, J. one of the judges said
that  he   rested  his	 judgment  on	the   common   sense
interpretation of  the word  'food' in the Order, apart from
its meaning in any other statute'. It is interesting to note
that in	 a case before the Allahabad High Court in Annapurna
Biscuit Manufacturing  Co. v. State of U.P. the assessee had
contended that	biscuit was  an article of confectionery and
that contention was negatived. It is relevant to note, as we
have mentioned	earlier, that  when the	 Hindi text  of	 the
notification was  issued contemporaneously  with the English
version, the  words ('pakaya  hua bhojan')  were used as the
equivalent of the words 'cooked food'.
     It may be that biscuit is served at tea time and in its
wider  meaning	 'cooked  food'	 may  include  biscuit.	 But
ordinarily biscuit  is not  understood as  cooked food. If a
person goes  to a  hotel or  restaurant and  asks  for	some
cooked food  or cooked	food ('pakaya hua bhojan') certainly
he will	 not be served with biscuits in Uttar Pradesh. While
it is  not necessary to state in the present case as to what
all items  may be  called as  cooked food, we can definitely
say that  in the  context and background of the notification
biscuit cannot be treated as cooked food.
152
     The High  Court of	 Allahabad has in an earlier case in
Commissioner of	 Sales Tax  v. Jassu  Ram Bakery Dealer held
that biscuit  was not  cooked food. The High Court of Madhya
Pradesh has  also taken	 the same  view in  Commissioner  of
Sales Tax  Madhya Pradesh  v. Shri  Ballabhdas Iswardas.  We
approve of the views expressed in the aforesaid decisions.
     There is  no ground  to interfere with the orders under
appeal. In  the result,	 this appeal fails and is dismissed.
No costs.
S.R.					   Appeal dismissed.
153




