

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
R.K. Khandelwal vs State Of U.P. & Others on 11 August, 1981Equivalent citations: 1981 AIR 1673, 1981 SCC  (3) 592
Author: Y Chandrachud
Bench: Chandrachud, Y.V. ((Cj)
           PETITIONER:
R.K. KHANDELWAL

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF U.P. & OTHERS

DATE OF JUDGMENT11/08/1981

BENCH:
CHANDRACHUD, Y.V. ((CJ)
BENCH:
CHANDRACHUD, Y.V. ((CJ)
VARADARAJAN, A. (J)

CITATION:
 1981 AIR 1673		  1981 SCC  (3) 592
 1981 SCALE  (3)1149


ACT:
     Constitution  of  India  1950  Articles  226  and	136-
Admission  to	M.D.  Course-Change   in  the	practice  of
admission-Whether discontinuance  of a	mere  Practice	will
sustain a charge of injury to legal rights.
     Appeal by	special leave-New  Point-Discrimination	 not
taken  in   writ  petition-Not	 argued	 in  High  Court-Not
mentioned in S.L.P.-Plea not permitted.



HEADNOTE:
     The  appellant   applied  for  admission  to  the	M.D.
(Paediatrics) Course  for the  academic year 1979-80. He had
passed his  M.B.B.S. Examination  in December,	1976.  There
were other students who had applied for admission along with
the appellant.	Some  of  them	had  passed  their  M.B.B.S.
Examination prior  to December	1976 and  had secured higher
marks than the appellant. The number of seats being limited,
admissions were	 given according  to merit and four students
who had	 secured the  highest number  of  marks	 were  given
preference to  others regardless  of the  year in which they
had passed their M.B.B.S. Examination.
     The appellant  filed a  writ petition in the High Court
challenging the	 E decision  of the  college by which he was
denied admission.  The petition was dismissed summarily by a
Division Bench	on the	ground that  the relief	 of mandamus
could not  be granted  since the  appellant had.  failed  to
establish that any of his legal rights was violated.
     In the  appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf
of the	appellant that:	 (a) For  many	years  in  the	past
candidates  who	 had  passed  the  D.C.H.  Examination	were
preferred for  admission to  the M.D.  Course but  that	 the
University suddenly  discontinued that practice, as a result
of which  he had to compete with others who had passed their
M.B.B.S. Examination, and (b) the ratio 1:1 between teachers
and students was relaxed from time to time by the University
and that  the appellant	 was discriminated  against  by	 the
arbitrary refusal  of the  authorities to relax the ratio in
his favour.
     Dismissing the appeal,
^
     HELD: The	appellant has  failed to  make out a case of
injury to any of his legal rights. Because of interim orders
passed	by   this  Court   directing  the  College  and	 the
University  to	 admit	the  appellant	to  M.D.  Course  in
Paediatrics, the College cancelled the appellant's admission
to the	D.C.H. Course.	If the appellant has passed the M.D.
Examination, he	 should be  declared to	 have passed it like
any other  student.  He	 should	 not  be  subjected  to	 any
disadvantage for the
284
reason that  he was not entitled initially to be admitted to
the M.D.  Course in  Paediatrics. If he has failed he should
be permitted  to take  the examination	again (or  again and
again) in accordance with the rules of the University. Since
the result  of the  other students, who had appeared for the
M.D. Examination  along with  the appellant, was declared in
February,  1981	  the  appellant's  result  to	be  declared
forthwith. [287 B-F]
     (a) There	was no	rule at	 any time  requiring that an
applicant  seeking   admission	to   the  M.D.	 Course	  in
Paediatrics had	 to pass his D.C.H. Examination. That such a
practice was recognised over many years or that such was the
understanding of  all concerned has been denied on behalf of
the College.  Besides  discontinuance  of  a  mere  practice
cannot sustain	a charge  of injury  to	 legal	rights.	 The
practice had  not ripened into a rule and the University was
under no obligation to admit only those who had passed their
D.C.H. Examination.  The appellant  therefore cannot  make a
grievance of  a change	in the practice for admission to the
M.D. Course. [285 G-286 B]
     In the  instant case  no one  was admitted	 to the M.D.
Course who  had secured	 lesser marks than the appellant. He
was sixth  in order  of merit and there were only four seats
available. [286 E]
     (b) If  there is a power to relax the ratio, that power
must be	 exercised  reasonably	and  fairly.  It  cannot  be
exercised  arbitrarily	 to  favour  some  students  and  to
disfavour some others. [286 G]
     In the  instant case  this point  of discrimination was
not taken  in the writ petition filed in the High Court, not
argued in  the High  Court, and	 not even  mentioned in	 the
Special Leave  Petition. The  question	as  to	whether	 the
authorities have  the power  to	 relax	the  ratio  and	 the
further question as to whether that power has been exercised
arbitrarily raise  new points  into which it is difficult to
enquire for  the first	time. This  plea cannot therefore be
entertained. [286 H-287 A]



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 2324 of
1980.
     Appeal by	special leave  from the	 judgment and  order
dated the  23rd April,	1979 of	 the Allahabad High Court in
Civil Misc. Writ No. 2228 of 1979.
     Dr. L. M. Singhvi, and S. K. Verma for the Appellant.
     Mrs. Shobha Dikshit for Respondent Nos. I & 2.
     S. N.  Kacker and	B. R.  Agarwala &  P. G. Gokhale for
Respondent No. 4.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     CHANDRACHUD, C.  J.:  The	question  which	 arises	 for
consideration in  this appeal  is whether the appellant, Dr.
R. K.
285
Khandelwal, is	entitled to  be admitted to the M. D. Course
in Paediatrics of the Agra University and whether in denying
him that  opportunity, the  State has  violated any  of	 his
legal rights.
     The appellant  passed his M.B.B.S. Examination from the
S. N.  Medical College, Agra, in December 1976 and completed
his  internship	  in  December	 1977.	Being	desirous  of
prosecuting post-graduate  studies in Paediatrics, he took a
year s	house job in the Paediatrics Department of the S. N.
Medical College	 Hospital, which  he  completed	 in  January
1979. He  then applied	for admission to the M. D. Course in
Paediatrics for	 the academic  year 1979-80. He was admitted
to the	D.C.H. Course  but he  was refused  admission to the
M.D.  Course   on  two	grounds:  First,  that	amongst	 the
applicants for	the M.	D. Course  in Paediatrics there were
four students  who had	secured higher marks than him in the
M.B.B.S. Examination,  and second,  that on the basis of the
1:1 ratio  between teachers  and students,  there were	only
four  seats   available	 for  the  post-graduate  course  in
Paediatrics.
     The appellant  filed a  writ petition in the High Court
of Allahabad  challenging the  decision of  the	 College  by
which he  was denied  admission to  M.D. (Paediatrics). That
petition was  dismissed summarily by a Division Bench of the
High Court  on the ground that the relief of mandamus sought
by the	appellant could	 not be	 granted to him since he had
failed to  establish  that  any	 of  his  legal	 rights	 was
violated. This	appeal by  special leave is directed against
the High Court's order dated April 23, 1979.
     The appellant,  as stated	earlier, was admitted to the
D.C.H. Course  after  he  had  finished	 his  house  job  in
Paediatrics. His  case is  that for  many years in the past,
candidates  who	 had  passed  the  D.C.H.  Examination	were
preferred for  admission to  the M.  D. Course	but that the
University suddenly  discontinued that practice, as a result
of which  he had to compete with others who had passed their
M.B.B.S.  Examination.	 There	is   no	 substance  in	this
contention and	in any	case the  appellant  cannot  make  a
grievance of  a change	in the practice for admission to the
particular course. Admittedly, there was no rule at any time
requiring that	an applicant  seeking admission	 to the M.D.
Course in  Paediatrics had  to pass  his D.C.H. Examination.
All that  is alleged  is that such a practice was recognised
over many  years or  at least,	that  such  was	 the  under-
standing  of  all  concerned.  Both  the  practice  and	 the
understanding have been denied on behalf of the College. But
apart from that,
286
discontinuance of a mere practice cannot sustain a charge of
injury to  legal rights. The practice had not ripened into a
rule and  the University  was under  no obligation  to admit
only those  who had passed their D.C.H. Examination. We also
feel some difficulty on the facts before us in accepting the
contention  of	 the  appellant	  that	passing	 the  D.C.H.
Examination was a passport for admission to the M.D. Course.
It may,	 at the	 highest, be  said that	 it was	 easier	 for
students to  get admitted  to the  M.D. Course after passing
the additional	examination of	D.C.H.	after  the  M.B.B.S.
Examination.
     The  appellant   applied  for  admission  to  the	M.D.
(Paediatrics Course  for the  academic year  1979-80. He had
passed his M.B.B.S. Examination in December 1976. There were
other students	who had	 applied for  admission to  the M.D.
Course in Paediatrics along with the appellant. Some of them
had passed their M.B.B.S. Examination prior to December 1976
and had	 secured higher marks than the marks obtained by the
appellant in  the December  1976 Examination.  The number of
seats being  limited, admissions  were	given  according  to
merit and  the four  students who had secured highest number
of marks  were given  preference to others regardless of the
year in which they had passed their M.B.B.S. Examination.
No one	was admitted  to the  1979-80 academic	year for the
M.D. Course  in Paediatrics,  who had  secured lesser  marks
than the  appellant. The four students who secured admission
had obtained  marks varying  between 60.06%  to 65.80% while
the appellant had secured 58.56% marks only. He was sixth in
order of  merit amongst	 the applicants	 and there were only
four seats  available bearing  in  mind	 the  ratio  of	 1:1
between the teachers and the students.
     Dr. Singhvi,  who appears	on behalf  of the appellant,
raised a  further contention  that the ratio 1:1 was relaxed
from time  to time  by the University and that the appellant
was discriminated  against by  the arbitrary  refusal of the
authorities to	relax  the  ratio  in  his  favour.  We	 are
prepared to  accept that  if there  is a  power to relax the
ratio, that  power must	 be exercised reasonably and fairly.
It cannot  be exercised	 arbitrarily to favour some students
and to	disfavour some others. But the difficulty in the way
of the	learned counsel is that this point of discrimination
was not	 taken in  the Writ  Petition which was filed in the
High Court,  it was  not argued in the High Court and is not
even mentioned	in the Special Leave Petition before us. The
question as  to whether	 the authorities  have the  power to
relax the  ratio and the further question as to whether that
power has  been exercised arbitrarily in this case raise new
points
287
into which  it is  difficult for us to enquire for the first
time. We  are therefore	 unable to  entertain the submission
made by the counsel.
     The appellant  has thus  failed to	 make out  a case of
injury to  any of  his legal  rights, for  which reason	 the
appeal must  fail. The	appeal is accordingly dismissed. But
considering that  under interim	 orders passed by this Court
from time  to time  the appellant  has appeared for the M.D.
Examination on	the completion	of the	Course, we hope that
the University	and the	 S.N. Medical  College will  take  a
sympathetic view of the appellant's case and have his result
declared. It  may be  mentioned that  because of the interim
orders passed  by this	Court directing	 the College and the
University to  admit the  appellant to	the M.D.  Course  in
Paediatrics, the College cancelled the appellant's admission
to the	D.C.H. Course.	That may  have been right because no
student can  do the  D.C.H.  Course  and  the  M  D.  Course
simultaneously. But  the point of the matter is that if this
Court were  not to  direct as  an interim  measure that	 the
appellant should be allowed to prosecute his studies in M.D.
Paediatrics (subject  to the  result of	 this  Appeal),	 the
appellant  might  have	completed  his	D.C.H.	Course	and,
subject to  being admitted  to the M.D. Course within a year
or so  from now	 he would  have taken  his M.D.	 Examination
after  passing	 the  D.C.H.  Examination.  The	 authorities
concerned will bear in mind that the appellant should not be
placed in  a worse  position than he would have been in, had
he not	filed this  appeal. Therefore,	if the appellant has
passed the examination, he should be declared to have passed
it like any other student. He should not be subjected to any
disadvantage  for  the	reason	that  he  was  not  entitled
initially to  be admitted to the M.D. Course in Paediatrics.
If he  has failed,  he	should	be  permitted  to  take	 the
examination again  (or again  and again)  in accordance with
the rules  of the  University. Since the result of the other
students, who  had appeared  for the  M.D. Examination along
with the  appellant, was  declared in February 1981, we hope
that the appellant's result would be declared forthwith.
     There will be no order as to costs.
N.V.K.					   Appeal dismissed.
288




