

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
State Of West Bengal vs Shew Mangal Singh & Ors on 25 August, 1981Equivalent citations: 1981 AIR 1917, 1982 SCR  (1) 360
Author: Y Chandrachud
Bench: Chandrachud, Y.V. ((Cj)
           PETITIONER:
STATE OF WEST BENGAL

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
SHEW MANGAL SINGH & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT25/08/1981

BENCH:
CHANDRACHUD, Y.V. ((CJ)
BENCH:
CHANDRACHUD, Y.V. ((CJ)
ERADI, V. BALAKRISHNA (J)

CITATION:
 1981 AIR 1917		  1982 SCR  (1) 360
 1981 SCC  (4)	 2	  1981 SCALE  (3)1249


ACT:
     Constitution of  India, 1950, Art. 136-Special Leave to
appeal-Criminal Trial-Conviction by trial court-Acquittal by
High Court-Interference by Supreme Court-When arises.
     Indian Penal Code 1860 (Act 45 of 1860) S. 76-Scope of-
Command of superior officer to open fire-Subordinate officer
in execution  of command  causes death-Subordinate officer's
belief that command was lawful-Enquiry into-When arises.
     Criminal Trial-Duty  of Courts-To ensure that innocents
are not convicted and guilty are not acquitted.



HEADNOTE:
     The respondents  were police  officers. The prosecution
alleged that  when the deceased and his brother were sitting
outside	 the   house  three  police  vehicles  carrying	 the
respondents and	 other police  officers suddenly  stopped in
front of  their house  and  that  a  police  officer  rushed
towards them  and when	the deceased  disclosed his identity
the officer  fired at  point blank  range. The	shot  having
missed him, he rushed in the house. Pursuing him respondents
2 and 4 dragged him out of the house, whereupon respondent 4
fired a	 shot at  him. In  the meanwhile, the other brother,
who was	 trying to  get into the house was caught hold of by
some of the respondents and respondent 1 fired at him.
     The two  brothers were  thereafter dumped into a police
jeep, and  the convoy  of police  officers departed from the
scene of the occurrence. Both the brothers were taken to the
hospital where	the deceased  was declared  dead on the spot
and his brother died, before any medical assistance could be
given to him.
     The defence  of the  respondents was  as follows:	that
while they  were on  patrol duty led by one of the officers,
they were  attacked by	some persons,  as a  result of which
respondent 1  was injured  and was  removed to the hospital.
When fire  was opened  under orders  of the  officer the two
deceased received  injuries, and  that respondents  1 and  2
were falsely  implicated after an attempt to pressurise them
into deposing against the officer had failed.
     Prosecution was  initiated on  the basis  of a  private
complaint  filed  by  the  third  brother  of  the  deceased
implicating the	 respondents and two officers. No action was
taken against  the two	officers for  want of section 197 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure.
     While the	trial  judge  convicted	 and  sentenced	 the
respondents, the  High Court acquitted them. Before the High
Court it was contended on behalf of the
361
State that  this was  a case  in which the protectors of law
and order  had become  A predators  and in the circumstances
the Court should not, insist upon the same standard of proof
as in  other criminal  cases,  and  as	the  witnesses	were
desposing nearly  nine years  after the date of the incident
there was  bound to  be	 discrepancies	in  their  evidence.
Taking note of the unsettled political conditions prevailing
in Calcutta  during the	 time, and  on an  analysis  of	 the
prosecution evidence,  the High Court found it impossible to
believe that the incident had happened in the manner alleged
by the prosecution. Believing the defence version that there
was mob	 violence which resulted in injuries to Respondent I
and that  in the circumstances the respondents were bound to
obey the  orders given	by their  officer,  the	 High  Court
acquitted them.
     Dismissing the Special Leave Petition of the State,
^
     HELD: 1.  If the  order to	 open fire  was justified as
found by  the High Court and is therefore lawful, no further
question can  arise whether  the respondents,  who acted  in
obedience to  that order,  believed or did not believe it to
be lawful. [365 F-G]
     In the  instant case  since the situation prevailing at
the scene  of the  offence was	such as to justify the order
given by  the officer  to open	fire, the  respondents could
plead in  defence that they acted in obedience to that order
and therefore  they could  not be held guilty of the offence
of which they were charged. [366 C]
     2.	 A   miscarriage  of  justice  may  arise  from	 the
acquittal of  the guilty no less than from the conviction of
the innocent and that if unmerited acquittal become general,
they tend  to lead to a cynical disregard of the law. Courts
must take  equal care  to ensure  that the  innocent are not
convicted and the guilty are not acquitted. [367 A-B] E
     In the instant case, what the High Court has done is to
acquit the innocent.[367 B]
     S.S. Bobade  v. State  of Maharastra [1974] 1 S.C.R 489
referred to.
     3. It  is a  self-rigteous assumption to argue that the
respondents are	 "undoubtedly guilty of murder" or that they
have been  acquitted by	 the High  Court  "light-heartedly".
Respondents are	 undoubtedly not  guilty of murder. The High
Court's judgment  reflects its	serious concern for justice.
Judgments of  acquittal are  not to  be condemned as "light-
hearted" for  the reason  that the Government considers that
it has a stake in the conviction of the accused. [367 C-D]
     In the  instant case  the particular night on which the
incident took  place was  cloudy and it was drizzling. It is
very difficult	to take	 the witnesses	at their  word	when
their evidence	suffers	 from  various	contradictions.	 The
witnesses were	deposing to  the incident  nearly nine years
later. Their  evidence	is  insufficient  to  establish	 the
complicity of  the respondents	in causing  the death of the
deceased. The  surviving brother  lodged the  complaint more
than a	month after  the incident.  The name  of  PW.  2  an
important witness  who was in the company of P.W. 1 from the
beginning  of	the  incident	was  not  mentioned  in	 the
complaint. [366 E-H]
362



JUDGMENT:
     CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Special Leave Petition
(Criminal) No. 3459 of 1980.
     From the  judgment and order dated the 1st August, 1980
of the	High Court  of Calcutta in Criminal Appeal No. 18 of
1980.
     A. P.  Chatterjee, A.K. Ganguly and B. K Chatterjee for
the Petitioner.
     A. K.  Sen, D.  N. Mukherjee  and N.  R. Choudhury	 for
Respondent Nos. 1.4
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     CHANDRACHUD, C.J:	This Special Leave Petition is filed
by  the	 State	of  West  Bengal  against  the	judgment  of
acquittal dated	 August 1,  1980 passed by the High Court of
Calcutta in Criminal Appeal No. 18 of 1980.
     The respondents,  who are	all  Police  officers,	were
tried by  the learned  Judge, City Sessions Court, Calcutta,
under section 302 read with section 34 of the Penal Code, on
the charge  that at  about 10.00  p.m. On  November 11, 1970
they,  along   with  Bibhuti  Chakraborty  the	then  Deputy
Commissioner of Police (North Division), P. R. Dey, the then
Assistant Commissioner	of Police  (N.S.) and  some  others,
caused the death of Ranjit Chakraborty and Samir Chakraborty
by causing them gunshot injuries.
     The case of the prosecution is that the deceased Ranjit
and his	 brother Samir were sitting outside their house when
three police  vehicles carrying	 the respondents  and  other
Police officers,  numbering about  15 or 20 in all, suddenly
stopped in  front of  the house. The Police officers, led by
Bibhuti Chakraborty,  rushed towards  them and	their  elder
brother	 Benoy,	  with	revolvers  in  their  hands.  Ranjit
disclosed that he was a constable of the Calcutta Police and
Samir  said   that  he	was  an	 N.  V.	 F.  cadet.  Bibhuti
Chakraborty then  fired a  shot from  his revolver at Ranjit
from  a	 point-blank  range.  Respondent  2,  Chitta  Ranjan
Ganguly, and  respondent 4,  Bimal Thakur pursued Ranjit who
had in the meanwhile rushed into his house. They dragged him
out of	the house,  whereupon respondent  4 fired  a shot at
him. The  other	 Police	 officers,  including  some  of	 the
respondents, also  fired at  Ranjit. In	 the  meantime,	 the
other brother  Samir, who  was trying to get into the house,
was caught hold of by
363
some of the respondents and respondent 1, Shew Mangal Singh,
fired a shot at him. Samir and Ranjit were thereafter dumped
in to  a Police	 jeep and  the convoy of the Police officers
went to	 a place  near Rajarghat  on the  bank of  the river
Hooghly. Samir	was crying  in agony.  Some  of	 the  Police
officers who  were sitting in an Ambassador car ordered that
Samir's voice  should be  silenced. Thereupon  respondent  3
Anil Maitra: who was sitting in a jeep, fired a shot at him.
Ranjit and  Samir were	then taken  to R.  G. Kar  Hospital,
where Ranjit  was declared  dead. Samir	 died within  a	 few
minutes thereafter,  before any	 medical assistance could be
given to  him. Their brother Benoy was taken into custody by
the Police  Officers and was produced before a Magistrate on
the following day, when he was released on bail.
     The defence  of the  respondents is  that they  were on
patrol	duty   Led  by	 Bibhuti  Chakraborty,	 the  Deputy
Commissioner  of  Police.  When	 the  police  party  entered
Shyampukur Street,  they were attacked by some persons, as a
result of  which respondent 1 Shew Mangal Singh was injured.
He was	immediately removed  by respondent  2 and P. R. Dey,
the Assistant  Commissioner  of	 Police,  to  the  R.G.	 Kar
Hospital. Thereafter  the Deputy Commissioner of Police gave
firing orders,	as  a  result  of  which  Ranjit  and  Samir
received injuries.  The contention of respondents 1 and 2 is
that they  were implicated  falsely in	the  case  after  an
attempt to  pressurise them into deposing against the Deputy
Commissioner had failed.
     The prosecution was initiated on the basis of a private
complaint filed	 on December  22, 1970	by Benoy Chakraborty
(P. W.	l). In	addition to  the  four	respondents,  Deputy
Commissioner Bibhuti  Chakraborty and Assistant Commissioner
P. R.  Dey were	 also included	in the array of the accused.
The  learned   Additional  Chief   Metropolitan	 Magistrate,
Calcutta, issued  process against the respondent but refused
to do  so against  the two  other officers  on the ground of
want of	 sanction for their prosecution under section 197 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure.
     The complainant  applied for sanction under section 197
Cr. P.	C., for	 the prosecution of the two officers but his
application was	 rejected. In July 1977, after the change of
Government, the	 complainant filed  another application	 for
sanction, which	 was granted  on August	 4,  1977.  But	 the
officers filed	a petition  in the  High Court under Article
226 of the Constitution challenging the order of sanction. A
learned single Judge dismissed that petition but in
364
appeal, a  Division Bench  of the  High Court  set aside the
order sanctioning prosecution on the ground of mala fides on
the part  of the  State Government  and	 on  the  ground  of
violation of  the rules of natural justice. There the matter
rested in so far as those two officers are concerned.
     The learned trial Judge convicted the respondents under
section 302  read with	section 34  of the  Penal  Code	 and
sentenced them to life imprisonment.
     In an  appeal by  the respondents,	 the High  Court has
acquitted them,	 against which	the State of West Bengal has
filed this  Special Leave  Petition under Article 136 of the
Constitution.
     The learned  Advocate General  of	the  State  of	West
Bengal, who appeared to defend the appeal in the High Court,
contended there that this is not a normal case of murder but
a rather unique one in which the protectors of law and order
had themselves	become predators  and, in the circumstances,
there were  bound to  be loop holes in the prosecution case.
It was	urged  in  the	High  Court  that  one	should	not,
therefore, expect  or insist upon the same standard of proof
as in  other criminal  cases. In regard to the discrepancies
in the	evidence of  the prosecution witnesses, it was urged
by the	learned Advocate General in the High Court, that the
witnesses were	deposing nearly nine years after the date of
the incident,  as a  result of	which there were bound to be
discrepancies  in   their  evidence.   On  the	question  of
application of section 34, it was urged in the High Court on
behalf of  the State  Government that  even if it may not be
possible to  apportion the  guilt amongst the accused, their
mere presence  at the spot would establish their involvement
in the offences with which they were charged.
     The judgment  of the  High Court shows that in the year
1970-71 certain parts of the State of West Bengal, including
the City of Calcutta, were passing through a critical period
of lawlessness on account or the "Naxal Movement". A sitting
Judge of  the High Court and a member of the Higher Judicial
Service	 were	killed	in   Calcutta  during  that  period.
Political leaders,  businessmen and  members of	 the  Police
Force also  met with  their  death  during  that  period  of
turbulence. Benoy  Chakraborty (P.  W. l)  admitted  in	 his
evidence  to   have  stated  in	 the  committal	 Court	that
newspapers had	reported  seven	 or  eight  murders  between
August 1970 and April 1971. Manicklal Ghose (P. W. ') stated
in his evidence that many
365
murders	  were	 committed   during   1970-71	within	 the
jurisdiction of	 A the	Shyampukur Thana.  On an analysis of
the prosecution evidence, the High Court found it impossible
to hold	 that the  incident in	question had happened in the
manner alleged	by the	prosecution. According	to the	High
Court, the  police, while  on patrol duty, were compelled to
open fire  after respondent l, Shew Singh, received injuries
as a  result of	 the mob violence. Since the orders given by
the  Deputy   Commissioner  to	open  fire  were  justified,
respondents were  bound to  obey the  lawful orders of their
superior officer.  On this  ground alone,  according to	 the
High Court, the accused were entitled to be acquitted.
     Learned counsel  who appears  for	the  State  of	West
Bengal argued  this Special  Leave Petition  for quite	some
time and  in addition,	at our	direction, he  filed written
submissions in	support of  the petition.  We adjourned	 the
matter to  enable us to go through those submissions. Having
done so	 we are	 unable to  hold that this is a fit case for
granting leave to the State Government to appeal against the
judgment of the High Court.
     A very interesting and important question was raised in
the High  Court as  to whether	the command  of	 a  superior
officer to  open  fire	affords	 a  complete  defence  to  a
subordinate officer  if, while	acting in  the execution  of
that command  he causes	 injury or death. The High Court has
referred in its judgment to passages from Cross E and Jones'
"Introduction of  Criminal Law"	 (8th  edition,	 page  371);
Granville William's Text Book of Criminal Law (1978 edition,
page 408);  Smith & Hogan's Criminal Law (1978 edition, page
209); Colin  Howard's Criminal Law (page 424) and to a South
African Case.  It is  unnecessary for  us to  go  into	that
question for  the simple reason that we are of the view that
the High  Court was  justified in  coming to  the conclusion
that the  particular situation	warranted and  justified the
order issued  by the  Deputy Commissioner  of Police to open
fire. If  that order  was justified and is therefore lawful,
no further question can arise as to whether the respondents,
who acted  in obedience	 to that  order, believed or did not
believe that  order to	be lawful.  Such an  enquiry becomes
necessary only when the order of the superior officer, which
is pleaded  as a  defence, is  found not to be in conformity
with the commands of the law.
 Section 76	 of the	 Penal Code provides that nothing is
an offence  which is  done by  a person	 who is,  or who  by
reason of  a mistake  of fact and not by reason of a mistake
of law in good faith
366
believes himself  to  be,  bound  by  law,  to	do  it.	 The
illustration to that section says that if a soldier fires on
a mob  by the  order of	 his superior officer, in conformity
with the  commands of  the law,	 he commits  no offence. The
occasion to  apply the	provisions of  the section  does not
arise in  the instant  case since the question as to whether
the accused  believed in  good faith on account of a mistake
of fact	 that he  was bound  by law  to do  the act which is
alleged to  constitute an  offence, would  arise only if, to
the extent  relevant in	 this case,  the order or command of
the superior  officer  is  not	justified  or  is  otherwise
unlawful. Since the situation prevailing at the scene of the
offence was such as to justify the order given by the Deputy
Commissioner of	 Police to  open fire,	the respondents	 can
seek the  protection of that order and plead in defence that
they acted  in obedience  to that  order and  therefore they
cannot be  held guilty	of the	offence of  which  they	 are
charged. That  is the purport of the illustration to section
76.
     But considering  that a little politics appears to have
got mixed  up with  the trial of this case, it would be more
satisfactory not  to rest our judgment on this aspect of the
matter and  to consider	 whether the  evidence	led  by	 the
prosecution is	such on	 which a  conviction can  safely  be
founded.
     The particular  night on  which the incident took place
was cloudy and it was drizzling. On the question whether the
witnesses were	able to identify the respondents, it is very
difficult to  take them	 at their  word when  their evidence
suffers from  the various  contradictions to  which the High
Court has  referred. The  witnesses  were  deposing  to	 the
incident nearly	 nine years  later and	it appears  that the
made good  the lapses  of memory  by giving  a free  play to
their imagination.  Their evidence leaves much to be desired
and is	insufficient to	 establish  the	 complicity  of	 the
respondents  in	 causing  the  death  of  Ranjit  and  Samir
Chakraborty. Benoy lodged his complaint (Ext. 2) more than a
month  after   the  incident  and  yet	there  are  material
discrepancies between  what he	stated in  the complaint and
what he said in his evidence. Manick is an important witness
from the  point of view of the prosecution because he was in
the company  of Benoy  from the	 beginning of  the  incident
until they  were released  on  bail  the  next	day.  It  is
surprising that	 in the	 list of  witnesses filed  by  Benoy
along with  his complaint,  Manick's name does not figure at
all.
     Towards the  end of  his written  submissions,  learned
counsel for  the State of West Bengal has extracted passages
from a judgment
367
of this	 Court in S. S. Bobade v. State of Maharashtra(1) to
the effect  A that  a miscarriage  of justice may arise from
the acquittal of the guilty no less than from the conviction
of the	innocent and  that if  unmerited  acquittals  become
general, they  tend to	lead to	 a cynical  disregard of the
law.  With  respect,  we  share	 this  opinion	but  do	 not
appreciate its	relevance here.	 Courts must take equal care
to ensure that the innocent are not convicted and the guilty
are not	 acquitted but,	 what the  High Court has done is to
acquit the  innocent. Relying upon the observations in S. S.
Bobade, the  learned counsel  has stated  further  that	 the
judicial instrument has a public accountability and that the
history	 will	never  forgive	 "us"  if  police  officers,
undoubtedly    guilty	  of	murder,	    are	   acquitted
"lightheartedly". We cannot agree more. But the snag lies in
the   self-righteous   assumption   that   respondents	 are
"undoubtedly guilty  of	 murder"  or  that  they  have	been
acquitted by  the High	Court "lightheartedly".	 Respondents
are undoubtedly	 not guilty  of murder and the High Court' s
judgment reflects its serious concern for justice. Judgments
of acquittal  are not  to be condemned as "lighthearted" for
the reason that the Government considers that it has a stake
in the conviction of the accused.
     For  these	  reasons,  we	dismiss	 the  Special  Leave
Petition.
N V. K.					 Petition dismissed.
368




