

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Koopilan Uneen'S Daughter ... vs Koopilan Uneen'S Son Kuntalan ... on 6 August, 1981Equivalent citations: 1981 AIR 1683, 1982 SCR  (1) 183
Author: A Koshal
Bench: Koshal, A.D.
           PETITIONER:
KOOPILAN UNEEN'S DAUGHTER PATHUMMA & ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
KOOPILAN UNEEN'S SON KUNTALAN KUTTY DEAD BY LRS. & ORS,

DATE OF JUDGMENT06/08/1981

BENCH:
KOSHAL, A.D.
BENCH:
KOSHAL, A.D.
ERADI, V. BALAKRISHNA (J)
MISRA, R.B. (J)

CITATION:
 1981 AIR 1683		  1982 SCR  (1) 183
 1981 SCC  (3) 589	  1981 SCALE  (3)1240


ACT:
     Venue-Objection to the place of suing to be entertained
by Appellate or Revisional Court, condition to be fulfilled,
explained-Code of Civil Procedure, section 21(1).



HEADNOTE:
     In a  suit for partition of immovable property filed in
the Court  of Munsiff  Parappanangadi in  the year 1938 that
Court passed  a preliminary decree for partition on the 18th
February, 1940.	 The parties  to the  suit took	 no  further
interest in  the matter	 for more  than two  decades. In the
meantime according  to the order of the High Court of Kerala
dated December	22, 1956  refining the territorial limits of
the Courts  of Munsiffs	 functioning in district Calicut, of
which the  Court of  Munsiff at	 Parappanangadi was one, the
suit property came under the territorial jurisdiction of the
Munsiff's Court	 at  Manjeri.  The  plaintiff  on  the	18th
January, 1966  filed an	 application praying  that  a  final
decree the suit be passed. Defendant No. 12 immediately took
an objection  that the	Manjeri	 Court	had  no	 territorial
jurisdiction to	 hear the  application and  that the  matter
should have  been  agitated  in	 the  Court  of	 Munsiff  at
Parappanagadi. The  objection was  overruled by	 the Manjeri
Court which  proceeded to  partition the  property metes and
bounds and  ultimately passed  a final decree in that behalf
on 9th	July, 1968. An appeal filed against the final decree
by defendant  No. 12 failed, but he succeeded before learned
single Judge  of the Kerala High Court who ruled that it was
only the  Parappanangadi  Court	 that  had  the	 territorial
jurisdiction to	 entertain the	application  and  the  final
decree was set aside. Hence the appeal by special leave.
     Allowing the appeal, the Court
^
     HELD: 1:1.	 In order  that an objection to the place of
suing may  be entertained  by any  appellate  or  revisional
Court, the  fulfilment of  the following three conditions is
essential, according  to the  provisions contained  in	sub-
section (1)  of section	 21 of	the Code of Civil Procedure:
(i) The	 objection was taken in the Court of first instance;
(ii) it	 was taken  at the earliest possible opportunity and
in  case  where	 issues	 are  settled,	at  or	before	such
settlement; (iii)  there has  been a  consequent failure  of
justice. [185 F-G]
     1:2. In the present case conditions Nos. 1 and 2 are no
doubt fully  satisfied; but  before the two appellate Courts
below could  allow the objection to be taken, it was further
necessary that	a case	of failure  of justice on account of
the place  suing having	 been wrongly selected was made out.
Since the  respondents failed  to point out even before this
Court that a failure of justice had occurred by reason
184
of Manjeri  having been	 chosen as  the place  of suing, the
provisions of  sub-section (1)	of section 21 of the Code of
Civil Procedure	 made it  imperative for  the District Court
and the	 High Court  not to entertain the objection, whether
or not it was otherwise well founded. [185 H, 186 A-C]



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Civil  Appeal No. 564 of
1970.
     Appeal by	special leave  from the	 judgment and decree
dated the  3rd April,  1969 of the Kerala High Court in S.A.
No. 266 of 1968.
     A.S. Nambiyar for the Appellants.
     K.T. Harindra Nath, N. Sudhakaran and M.R.K. Pillai for
Respondent No. 1.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     KOSHAL, J.	 This appeal  by special  leave is  directed
against the  judgment dated  3rd of  April, 1969 of the High
Court of  Kerala rendered  in a Second Appeal arising from a
suit for partition of immovable property.
     2. The  suit was  filed in	 the  Court  of	 Munsiff  at
Parappanangadi	in  the	 year  1938.  That  Court  passed  a
preliminary decree  for partition on the 18th February, 1940
and thereafter	the parties  took no further interest in the
matter for  more than two decades. In the mean time the High
Court passed an order dated December 22, 1956 redefining the
territorial limits  of the Courts of Munsiffs functioning in
district  Calicut,   of	 which	 the  Court  of	 Munsiff  at
Parappanangadi	was   one.  According	to  that  order	 the
territory in  which the	 property disputed  in the  suit was
situated, came	under the  territorial jurisdiction  of	 the
Munsiff's Court at Manjeri and it was in that Court that the
plaintiff filed,  on the  18th January,	 1966 an application
(I.A. No.  109 of  1966) praying  that a final decree in the
suit be	 passed. Defendant  No. 12  (who is  now dead and is
represented in	this appeal  by respondents  No. 1 and Ors.)
immediately took  an objection that the Manjeri Court had no
territorial jurisdiction  to hear  the application  and that
the matter should have been agitated in the Court of Munsiff
at Parappananagadi.  The  objection  was  overruled  by	 the
Manjeri Court  which proceeded	to partition the property by
metes and  bounds and  ultimately passed  a final  decree in
that behalf on 9th July, 1968. An appeal was filed
185
against final  decree by  defendant No.	 12 in	the Court of
District Judge before whom the objection to the jurisdiction
assumed by  the	 Manjeri  Court	 was  again  taken  but	 was
repelled  with	 the  result   that  the  final	 decree	 was
confirmed.
     The third	round of litigation in regard to question of
jurisdiction took  place in the High Court wherein a learned
single Judge upheld the objection and ruled that it was only
the  Parappanangadi   Court   that   had   the	 territorial
jurisdiction to	 entertain the application praying for final
decree and  that the  assumption of such jurisdiction by the
Manjeri Court was not justified. The objection being upheld,
the final  decree was  set  aside  and	there  was  thus  no
occasion for  the High	Court to  decide  the  other  points
arising in this appeal.
     3. We have heard learned counsel for the parties on the
question of  jurisdiction. An  unfortunate  aspect  of	this
litigation has	been that  although that  question has	been
agitated already  in three  courts  and	 has  been  bone  of
contention between  that parties for more than a decade, the
real provision	of law	which  clinches	 it  was  never	 put
forward on  behalf  of	the  appellant	before	us  nor	 was
adverted to by the learned District Judge or the High Court.
That provision is contained in sub-section (1) of Section 21
of the Code of Civil Procedure which runs thus:
	  "21 (1)  No objection	 as to	the place  of  suing
     shall be  allowed by  any Appellate or Revisional Court
     unless such  objection was	 taken in the Court of first
     instance at  the earliest	possible opportunity  and in
     all cases	where issues  are settled, at or before such
     settlement, and  unless there  has	 been  a  consequent
     failure of justice."
     In order that an objection to the place of suing may be
entertained  by	  an  appellate	 or  revisional	 court,	 the
fulfilment of the following three conditions is essential:
     (1)  The objection	 was taken  in the  Court  of  first
	  instance.
     (2)  It was  taken at the earliest possible opportunity
	  and in  cases where  issues  are  settled,  at  or
	  before such settlement.
     (3)  There has been a consequent failure of justice.
     All these	three conditions  must co-exist.  Now in the
present case  conditions Nos.  1 and  2 are  no doubt  fully
satisfied; but then
186
before the  two	 appellate  Courts  below  could  allow	 the
objection to  be taken, it was further necessary that a case
of failure  of justice	on account  of the  place  of  suing
having been  wrongly selected  was made out. Not only was no
attention paid	to this aspect of the matter but no material
exists on  the record from which such failure of justice may
be  inferred.	We  called  upon  learned  counsel  for	 the
contesting respondents to point out to us even at this stage
any reason  why we should hold that a failure of justice had
occurred by  reason of	Manjeri having	been chosen  as	 the
place of suing but he was unable to put forward any. In this
view of	 the matter we must hold that the provisions of sub-
section above  exracted made  it imperative for the District
Court and  the High  Court not	to entertain  the  objection
whether or not it was otherwise well founded. We, therefore,
refrain from  going into  the question of the correctness of
finding arrived	 at by the High Court that the Manjeri Court
had territorial	 jurisdiction  to  take	 cognizance  of	 the
application praying for final decree.
     4. In  the result	we accept  the appeal, set aside the
judgment of  the High  Court and  remand the case back to it
for deciding  on merits	 the appeal which culminated in that
judgment. As  the proceedings for the final decree have been
pending since  1966, we	 further direct	 that the High Court
shall decide  the appeal  last	mentioned  at  the  earliest
possible and,  in any  case, within  three months  from	 the
receipt of  the records	 from this Court. The Registry shall
take immediate	steps to  have the records despatched to the
High Court. There will be no order as to costs.
S.R.					     Appeal allowed.
187




