

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
M/S Band Box P.Ltd vs Estate Officer Punjab & Sind Bank & ... on 25 February, 1947Author: .....................J.
Bench: H.L. Gokhale, Kurian Joseph
                                                                        REPORTABLE
                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA


                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2878   OF 2014
                         (Arising from SLP(C) No.21436/2012)




      M/s Band Box Private Limited                        ..Appellant


                         versus


      Estate Officer, Punjab & Sind Bank and Anr. ..Respondents






                                  O R D E R

                 Leave granted.

      2.         We have heard Mr. Harin P. Raval, learned senior counsel in
      support of this appeal and Mr. Vikas  Singh,  learned  senior  counsel
      appearing for the respondents.
      3.         This appeal seeks to challenge the judgment and order dated
      13.07.2012 passed by a Division Bench  of  the  Delhi  High  Court  in
      L.P.A. No.250/2012, whereby the Division  Bench  confirmed  the  order
      passed by the learned Single Judge as well as the orders passed by the
      District Judge  and  the  Estate  Officer.   The  appellant  has  been
      directed to be evicted under these orders from the concerned  premises
      situated at 18/90, Connaught Circus,New Delhi-110001.
      4.         The case of the appellant is that the  appellant  has  been
      occupying  these  premises  right  from  26th  March,  1952  and   the
      respondent-Bank became owner of  this  property  only  on  31.12.1978.
      There were some initial notices issued to the appellant to vacate  the
      premises, but ultimately it is the notice dated 15.11.1999 with  which
      we are concerned in the present matter. It was the  notice  issued  by
      invoking the provisions of Section 106 of  the  Transfer  of  Property
      Act. This was followed by the proceeding to evict the appellant  which
      has led to the eviction order passed by the Estate Officer, and  which
      has been confirmed, as stated above, all throughout.
      5.         Mr. Raval submits that the appellant had raised  the  point
      of not being covered under  the  Public  Premises  Act,  1971  at  all
      stages.  He has drawn our attention to the order  passed by the Estate
      Officer, wherein it has been recorded  that  the  appellant  canvassed
      that the appellant's tenancy continued under the protection  of  Delhi
      Rent Control Act, and the respondents were not capable of  terminating
      the tenancy by mere  service  of  the  notice.   That  submission  was
      specifically rejected by  the  Estate  Officer  by  relying  upon  the
      judgment of this Court in Ashoka Marketing  Limited  and  another  vs.
      Punjab National Bank and others reported in (1990) 4 SCC 406.
      6.         Mr. Raval submits that the said plea was reiterated  before
      the District Judge, and it is reflected in paragraph 5 of the order of
      the District Judge.  Thereafter, this plea has been raised before  the
      learned Single Judge, and also in the Special  leave  petition  before
      this Court.  Mr. Raval has drawn the attention of this  Court  to  the
      judgment in the case of Dr. Suhas H. Pophale  vs.  Oriental  Insurance
      Co. Limited reported in 2014 (2) SCALE 223. In this judgment, to which
      one of us (H.L. Gokhale, J.) was a party, this Court has held that the
      Public Premises Act cannot  be  applied  to  the  premises  where  the
      occupants have come in possession thereof, prior to the application of
      the Act, i.e., prior to 16th September, 1958.  In  the  circumstances,
      Mr. Raval submits that all these  orders  should  be  set  aside,  the
      appeal should be  allowed  and  the  eviction  proceedings  should  be
      dismissed.
      7.         On the other hand, it was submitted  by  Mr.  Vikas  Singh,
      learned senior counsel appearing  for  the  respondent-Bank  that  the
      appellant had raised at an intermediate stage the plea  of  not  being
      covered under the Public Premises Act, and  had  subsequently  dropped
      that plea. They had then relied upon guidelines  and,  therefore,  the
      plea, which is sought to be  raised  at  a  second  stage,  cannot  be
      allowed to be raised now on the ground of res  judicata,  as  well  as
      constructive res judicata.  As far as  this  objection  of  Mr.  Vikas
      Singh is concerned, inasmuch as the plea raised by Mr. Raval is  based
      on a legal submission, we would not like the appellant  to  be  denied
      the opportunity of raising the legal plea and, therefore,  we  do  not
      accept this submission.
      8.         There are two other submissions raised by Mr. Vikas  Singh.
      Firstly, he drew our attention to the fact that  in  Ashoka  Marketing
      Limited (supra), there were two properties involved, namely, one  that
      was of Ashoka Marketing Limited and the second was of  M/s  Sahu  Jain
      Services  Limited.  Both  the  parties  were  occupying  the  premises
      concerned since 1.7.1958, i.e., prior to  the  date  when  the  Public
      Premises Act became applicable, and in spite of that their submissions
      have been rejected by the Constitution Bench. This being the position,
      in his submission, the view taken by  a Bench of  two  Judges  in  the
      case of Dr. Suhas H Pophale(supra) is erroneous.  We have  noted  this
      submission of Mr. Vikas Singh. In paragraph 47 of the judgment in  the
      case of Dr. Suhas H. Pophale, this Court has referred to the  judgment
      in the case of M/s Jain Ink Manufacturing Company vs. L.I.C.  reported
      in (1980) 4 SCC 435, and has observed that  the  issue  of  protection
      under a welfare legislation being available to the tenant prior to the
      premises becoming public premises, and the issue  of  retrospectivity,
      was  not  under  consideration  before  the  Court  in  M/s  Jain  Ink
      Manufacturing Company (supra). The same holds good  for  the  judgment
      rendered in Ashoka Marketing Limited (supra), and that being so, since
      those aspects were not gone into in the judgment of  Ashoka  Marketing
      Limited (supra), this Court has examined them in the case of Dr. Suhas
      H. Pophale (supra).  This Court has specifically observed in paragraph
      50 thereof that for a moment this Court was not taking  any  different
      position from the propositions in Ashoka  Marketing  Limited  (supra).
      In fact, what was done was to clarify that  the  Public  Premises  Act
      will apply  only  in  certain  circumstances.   That  being  so,  this
      submission of Mr. Vikas Singh cannot be accepted.
      9.         He then referred us to a judgment of  another  Constitution
      Bench in the case of   Kaiser-I-Hind  Pvt.  Limited  and  another  vs.
      National textile Corporation (Maharashtra North)  Limited  and  others
      (2002) 8 SCC 182, and particularly paragraphs 40, 42 and  65  thereof.
            Paragraph 40 of this judgment reads as follows:
           “40. Once the PP Eviction Act is enacted, then the  Bombay  Rent
           Act would not prevail qua the repugnancy between it and  the  PP
           Eviction Act. To the extent of repugnancy, the State  law  would
           be void under Article 254(1) and  the  law  made  by  Parliament
           would prevail. Admittedly, the duration of the Bombay  Rent  Act
           was extended up to 31.3.1973 by Maharashtra Act 12 of 1970.  The
           result would be from the date of the coming into force of the PP
           Eviction Act, the Bombay Rent Act  qua  the  properties  of  the
           Government and government companies would  be  inoperative.  For
           this purpose, language of  Article  254(1)  is  unambiguous  and
           specifically provides that if any provision of law made  by  the
           legislature of the State is repugnant to the  provision  of  law
           made by Parliament, then the  law  made  by  Parliament  whether
           passed before or after the law made by the  legislature  of  the
           State, would prevail.  It also makes it clear that the law  made
           by the legislature of the State, to the  extent  of  repugnancy,
           would be void.”




      10.        As seen from  paragraph  40,  quoted  above,  the  judgment
      clearly says that the Bombay  Rent  Act  would  not  prevail  qua  the
      repugnancy between it and  the  Public  Premises  Eviction  Act.  That
      aspect has not been  contradicted  in  Dr.  Suhas  H.  Pophale's  case
      (supra). It also relies upon the judgment in Ashoka Marketing  Limited
      (supra) which says that the Public Premises Act as well as  the  State
      Rent Control Laws are both referable to entries in concurrent list and
      they operate in their own field.  It is only in the area  of  its  own
      that the State Rent Control Act applies and in  its  own  time  frame.
      The judgment in Dr. Suhas  Pophale's  case  accepts  that  the  Public
      Premises Act will prevail over the Bombay Rent Act to  the  extent  of
      repugnancy  i.e.  for  eviction  of  unauthorised  tenants   and   for
      collection of arrear of rent, but, not prior  to  16.9.1958  when  the
      Public Premises Act became applicable. Paragraphs 42 and 65 which  are
      relied upon also do not deal with the aspect  of  retrospectivity  and
      being protected under the welfare legislation. That being  so,  it  is
      not possible to accept this submission of Mr. Vikas Singh.
      11.        For the reasons stated above, we allow this appeal and  set
      aside the order passed by the Division Bench as well as by the  Single
      Judge, by the District Judge, and the Estate  Officer.   The  eviction
      proceedings initiated against the appellant will stand set aside.
      12.        Although, this appeal has been allowed  in  favour  of  the
      appellant, Mr. Vikas Singh has pointed out that when this appeal  came
      up for consideration at an earlier stage, this  Court  had  passed  an
      order on 6.8.2012, that the appellant shall pay a sum of Rs.1,80,000/-
      per month as rent.  Mr. Raval has taken  instructions,  and  has  very
      fairly stated that the appellant is aggreable to continue  to pay this
      amount, though otherwise the recorded rent is only Rs.183/- per month.
       The appellant has been paying this amount, as per the order passed by
      this Court  on  6.8.2012  and  shall  continue  to  pay  that  amount,
      hereinafter by way of rent. Mr. Raval  has  however  sought  that  the
      appellant shall pay this  rent  regularly,  but  it  should  get  some
      protection, inasmuch as he is  agreeing to pay this substantial higher
      amount.  Mr. Vikas Singh has taken instructions and he states that the
      appellant will be allowed to continue in the premises, at least, for a
      period of 12 (twelve) years, provided the appellant pays  the  monthly
      rent regularly, with a rider that at the end of every financial  year,
      the respondent-Bank will have the right  to  revise  the  rent  by  an
      increase of ten per cent.  Mr. Raval agrees to the suggestion  of  Mr.
      Vikas Singh.  Therefore, the  next  revision  of  rent  will  be  from
      1.4.2015.  We record this understanding between the parties and though
      this  appeal  is  allowed,  the  appellant  will  pay  the   rent   of
      Rs.1,80,000/- per month till the end of 31.3.2015, whereafter the Bank
      will be entitled to revise the rent by ten per cent every year. In the
      event of any default in paying the monthly rent,  the  respondent-Bank
      will be entitled to take the appropriate proceedings.   The  12  years
      period will be counted from 1.4.2013.  We make it further  clear  that
      after the expiry of twelve years, it will be open to  the  respondents
      to take steps under the Public Premises Act, 1971, if required.

                                          .....................J.
                                          [H.L. GOKHALE]






      NEW DELHI;                  .....................J.
      FEBRUARY 25, 2014.          [KURIAN JOSEPH]





