

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
State Bank Of India & Ors vs Surya Narain Tripathi on 11 February, 1947Author: H.L.Gokhale
Bench: H.L. Gokhale, Kurian Joseph
                                                                     REPORTABLE
                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                    CIVIL APPEAL NO.9730 OF 2011

State Bank of India & Ors.                              ......Appellants

                                Versus
Surya Narain Tripathi                            .....Respondents

                                JUDGMENT
H.L.GOKHALE,J.

(1)     This appeal seeks to challenge the  judgment  and  order  dated  7th
February, 2006 rendered by a Division Bench of the High Court  of  Allahabad
in Special Appeal No.318 of 2004 which confirmed the judgment of  a  learned
Single Judge dated 3rd August, 2014 in Writ Petition No.5045 of 1999.

(2)  Heard Mr. Vikas Singh learned senior counsel  appearing  on  behalf  of
the appellants and Mr. Sunny Choudhary learned counsel appearing  on  behalf
of the respondent.

(3)  The brief facts of this appeal are  that  the  one  B.P.  Tripathi  the
father of the first respondent was working in the State Bank of  India  from
27.12.1969 and he died while in service on 19.1.1998 after  completing  more
than 28 years of  service.   At  that  time  he  was  working  as  Assistant
Manager.  The  respondent  No.1  who  is  his  son  applied  for  a  job  on
compassionate basis and his application was turned down by  the  Bank  which
led to the writ petition.  The writ petition  was  allowed  by  the  learned
Single Judge and the  appeal  of  the   Bank    therefrom    was  dismissed.
Hence this appeal by special
                                                               ...2/-
                                :2:
 leave.

(4)  It is submitted by Mr. Vikas Singh  learned  senior  counsel  appearing
for appellants that earlier in the year 1979 there was  a  different  scheme
which was prevalent in the matter of compassionate appointment, and  amongst
others there was a provision for an interview under  clause  7.5(f)  of  the
Hand Book on Staff Matters. In 1994 this Court rendered a judgment in  Umesh
Kumar Nagpal vs. State of Haryana &  Ors.  reported  in  1994  (4)  SCC  138
wherein it was laid down that the object  of  compassionate  appointment  is
meant to enable the bereaved family of the deceased  employee  to  face  the
sudden financial crisis and not to provide employment  as  such.   This  led
the Bank to frame  another  policy  in  the  year  1998.  This  judgment  is
referred in the new policy and it is provided therein as an  objective  that
when the Bank is satisfied that the financial condition  of  the  family  is
such that it  requires employment that  compassionate  appointment  will  be
offered.

(5)  It is the case of the Bank that as far as the  present  appointment  is
concerned all relevant factors were considered.  It  was  noticed  that  the
salary of the deceased at the time of his death was Rs.8,970/-.  His  family
was given an amount of Rs.5,98,092/- plus 0.25 lakh  as  terminal  benefits.
If the said amount was to be  invested properly, it would  get  interest  at
least of Rs.5,000/-  p.m.   This  was  apart  from  the  family  pension  of
Rs.4208+Admissible                                                      D.A.
        ...3/-

                                :3:
 The Bank, therefore, took  the  view that the circumstances do not  warrant
the compassionate appointment for the respondent which was applied for.

(6)  Mr. Vikas Singh learned senior counsel pointed out that this Court  has
specifically gone into these aspects in the case of Union Bank  of  India  &
Ors. vs. M.T. Latheesh reported in 2006 (7) SCC  350  wherein  the  benefits
which would be received by the deceased employee were gone into and on  that
footing  the  Court  came  to  the  conclusion  that  if  the  benefits  are
comparable, then there is no case for  comparable  appointment.    The  same
view has been repeated in the case of appellant State  Bank  itself  in  the
case of State Bank of India & Ors. vs. Jaspal Kaur reported in 2007 (9)  SCC
571.

(7)      Mr. Sunny Choudhary counsel appearing for the  respondent,  on  the
other hand, submitted that this was a hard case, and the deceased  has  left
behind a large family.  Apart from the widow,  he  had  two  sons  and  five
daughters and three of them were unmarried.  Considering this  fact  it  was
expected that the Bank should provide appointment to one of the  members  of
the family when the main bread earner had passed away.  We relied  upon  the
judgment  of  this  Court  in  Govind  Prakash  Verma  vs.  Life   Insurance
Corporation of India & Ors. reported in 2005 (10) SCC 289 where a  view  has
been taken that the compassionate appointment  cannot  be  refused  on   the
ground that
                                                               ...4/-
                                :4:
another member of the family had received  appropriate  employment  and  the
service benefits were adequate.  We may humbly state  that  this  view  runs
counter to the view which was taken earlier  in  the  case  of  Umesh  Kumar
Nagpal which was not cited before the Court in Govind Prakash (supra).   The
subsequent two judgments which were referred above also take the  same  view
as in Umesh Nagpal (supra). Mr. Vikas Singh has drawn our attention  to  the
judgment in the case of  State  Bank  of  India  &  Anr.  vs.  Somvir  Singh
reported on 2007 (4) SCC 778 where the 1998 scheme has been considered.

(8)      In all the matters of compassionate appointment it must be  noticed
that it is basically a way out  for  the  family  which  is  financially  in
difficulties on account of the death of the bread  earner.   It  is  not  an
avenue for a regular employment as such.  This is in fact  an  exception  to
the provisions under Article 16 of the Constitution.  That being so,  if  an
employer points out that the  financial  arrangement  made  for  the  family
subsequent to the death of the employee is  adequate,  the  members  of  the
family cannot insist  that one of them ought to  be  provided  a  comparable
appointment.   This  being  the  principle  which  has  been   adopted   all
throughout,  it is difficult for us to accept the submission made on  behalf
of the respondent.

(9)     As stated earlier, the deceased left behind a  large  family.    The
fact however, remains that by now 15 years have gone since then.
                                                               ...5/-
                                :5:
Besides the Bank has  made  appropriate  financial  provision  at  par  with
similar arrangement that was noted  by  this  Court  in  the  case  of  M.T.
Latheesh (supra).  Therefore it is not possible  for  us  to  say  that  the
Court could have directed the Bank to  consider  compassionate  appointment.
In the circumstances, the appeal is allowed.  The judgment rendered  by  the
learned Single Judge as well as by the Division Bench are  set  aside.   The
writ  petition  No.5045  of  1999  filed  by  the  respondent  shall   stand
dismissed.

(10)    Although we are allowing this appeal, Mr. Vikas  Singh  very  fairly
stated that looking  at  the  difficulties  of  the  family,  and  that  the
respondent was required to  go  through  the  litigation  upto  the  Supreme
Court, the Court may consider granting appropriate  litigation  expenses  to
the respondent.  We quite  appreciate  this  gesture   and  order  that  the
appellant Bank will pay an amount of Rs.1 lakh to  the  respondent  on  this
count.  However, we make it clear that  this  order  on  costs  is  made  in
consideration of the special facts of this case.

                                           ...........................J.
                                                                 ( H.L.
GOKHALE )



                                           ...........................J.

(KURIAN JOSEPH )
NEW DELHI;
FEBRUARY 11, 2014.

ITEM NO.101               COURT NO.10             SECTION XI


            S U P R E M E   C O U R T   O F   I N D I A
                         RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS

                    CIVIL APPEAL NO(s). 9730 OF 2011


STATE BANK OF INDIA & ORS.                        Appellant (s)

                 VERSUS

SURYA NARAIN TRIPATHI                             Respondent(s)


Date: 11/02/2014  This Appeal was called on for hearing today.

CORAM :
        HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE H.L. GOKHALE
        HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KURIAN JOSEPH


For Appellant(s)        Mr. Vikas Singh, Sr.Adv.
                     Mr. Sanjay Kapur,Adv.
                        Ms. Priyanka Das, Adv.
                        Mr. Anmol Chandan, Adv.

For Respondent(s)       Mr. Sunny Chowdhary, Adv.
                     Mr. C.D. Singh,Adv.

           UPON hearing counsel the Court made the following
                               O R D E R

                The appeal is allowed in terms of the signed judgment.

        [Usha Bhardwaj]                  [Sneh Lata Sharma]
          A.R-cum-P.S.                       Court Master

                Signed reportable judgment is placed on the file.

