

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Union Of India vs M/S. Pam Development Pvt. Ltd on 18 February, 1947Author: ....................
Bench: Surinder Singh Nijjar, Ranjana Prakash Desai
                                                                             REPORTABLE
                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA


                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                        CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5618 OF 2006


           UNION OF INDIA                              ...APPELLANT


                                 VERSUS


           M/S PAM DEVELOPMENT PVT. LTD.      ...RESPONDENT


                                    ORDER

                  This  appeal  has  been  filed  by  the  Union  of  India
           challenging the judgment and order of the  Calcutta  High  Court
           dated 15th June, 2005 rendered in APOT NO.643 of 2003.

                 We may notice here the bare essential facts,  which  would
           have a bearing on the legal controversy  involved in the appeal.

                 On 19th October,  1992,  the  appellant  entered  into  an
           agreement with the respondent  for  construction  of  Industrial
           Covered Electrical Loco Shed.  Subsequently,  according  to  the
           appellant, the agreement was terminated in terms of clause 64 of
           the General  Conditions  of  Contract  by  which  the  agreement
           between  the  parties  was  governed.   The  twin  reasons   for
           termination of the contract were that the  respondent  initially
           delayed the commencement of the work and subsequently executed
                                                                      ...2/-

                                     :2:
           the  work  which  was  of  inferior  quality.   Therefore,   the
           appellant had to get the balance  work  completed  from  another
           contractor.

                 On 24th July, 1996, the respondent raised  certain  claims
           against the appellant.

                 On 30th September, 1996, the respondent demanded that  the
           disputes be referred to arbitration.

                 Since the disputes were not referred to  arbitration,  the
           respondent approached the High Court of Calcutta  under  Section
           11(6) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (hereinafter
           referred to as “the Arbitration Act, 1996”) for the  appointment
           of a sole arbitrator.  The High Court by its  order  dated  10th
           July, 1998 appointed Mr. Justice Satyabrat  Mitra  as  the  sole
           arbitrator.   The  learned   arbitrator   duly   commenced   the
           arbitration  proceedings,   in   which   the   appellant   fully
           participated.  The appellant filed statement
                                                                      ...3/-

                                     :3:
           of defence. Upon completion of the arbitration proceedings,  the
           learned arbitrator made the award on  25th  January,  2002.  The
           claims of  the  respondent  were  accepted  and  the  award  was
           rendered  in  favour  of  the   contractor   in   the   sum   of
           Rs.1,29,89,768/-.

                 Aggrieved by the aforesaid award, the appellant  filed  an
           application under Section 34 of the Arbitration Act, 1996 before
           the High Court for setting aside the award.   The learned single
           judge of the High court dismissed the aforesaid  application  of
           the appellant on 28th October, 2003.

                 Aggrieved by the  aforesaid  order,  the  appellant  filed
           Intra-Court appeal before the Division Bench of the High  court,
           which has also been dismissed by  the  impugned  judgment  dated
           15th June, 2005.

                 The present appeal arises out of  Special  Leave  Petition
           (Civil) No.20316 of 2005.
                                                                      ...4/-

                                     :4:
                 We have heard the  learned  counsel  for  the  parties  at
           length.

                 Mr. P.P. Malhotra, learned Additional  Solicitor  General,
           appearing for the Union of India, submitted that the High  Court
           committed an error of jurisdiction by appointing a former  judge
           of the High court as the sole arbitrator.   The  appointment  of
           the sole arbitrator was against the contractual conditions which
           cannot be  ignored.   Therefore,  the  reference  was  before  a
           Arbitral Tribunal which had not been properly  constituted.   He
           also submitted  that  the  arbitrator  had  no  jurisdiction  to
           entertain the claims with regard to certain excepted matters.

                 On the other hand, the learned counsel for the  respondent
           has submitted that the  appellant  having  participated  in  the
           proceedings before the learned arbitrator without any  demur  or
           objection cannot now be permitted to raise  the  objection  with
           regard
                                                                      ...5/-

                                     :5:
           to the jurisdiction of the arbitrator  at  this  belated  stage.
           Learned counsel  further  submitted  that  in  view  of  express
           provision contained in Section 16 of the Arbitration Act,  1996,
           the  Arbitral  Tribunal  is  competent  to  rule  on   its   own
           jurisdiction.  He submits that pleas  with  regard  to  lack  of
           jurisdiction of the learned arbitrator ought to have been raised
           not later than the  submission  of  the  statement  of  defence.
           Learned counsel pointed out that no plea of lack of jurisdiction
           of the learned arbitrator was taken  by  the  appellant  in  the
           statement of  defence.   Furthermore,  the  appellant  also  led
           evidence in defence.  He also pointed out that the appellant, in
           fact, categorically accepted the  jurisdiction  of  the  learned
           arbitrator by filing a counter claim  in  the  proceedings.   He
           submits that, in such circumstances, the appellant  had  clearly
           waived its right to object to the constitution of  the  Arbitral
           Tribunal.  Similarly, the plea  of  excepted  matters  was  also
           never raised by the  appellant  during  the  entire  arbitration
           proceedings.  All claims have been decided on merits.
                 We have considered the submissions  made  by  the  learned
           counsel for the parties.
                                                                      ...6/-

                                     :6:
                 The arbitration agreement contained in clause  64  of  the
           General Conditions of Contract is as under:
                 “64(3)(a) ARBITRATION:  Matters  in  question,  dispute  or
                 difference to be arbitrated  upon  shall  be  referred  for
                 decision to


                 3(a)(i)   A  Sole  Arbitrator  who  shall  be  the  General
                 Manager or a Gazetted Railway Officer nominated by  him  in
                 that behalf in cases where the claim in question  is  below
                 Rs.5,00,000/- (Rupees five lakhs) and in  cases  where  the
                 issues involved are not of complicated nature.  The General
                 Manager shall be the sole Judge to decide  whether  or  not
                 the issues involved are of a complicated nature.

                 3(a)(ii) Two Arbitrators  who  shall  be  Gazetted  Railway
                 Officers of equal status to be appointed in the manner laid
                 in Clause 64(3)(b) or all claims of  Rs.5,00,000/-  (Rupees
                 five Lakhs) and above, and for all claims  irrespective  of
                 the amount of value of such claims if the  issues  involved
                 are of a complicated nature the General  Manager  shall  be
                 the sole Judge to decide whether the issues involved are of
                 a complicated nature or not.   In  the  event  of  the  two
                 Arbitrators being divided  in  their  opinions  the  matter
                 under  disputes  will  be  referred  to  an  Umpire  to  be
                 appointed in the manner laid down in Clause  3(b)  for  his
                 decision.

                 3(a)(iii) It is a term of  this  contract  that  no  person
                 other than a Gazetted Railway Officer,  should  act  as  an
                 Arbitrator/Umpire  and  if  for  any  reason,  that  is  no
                 possible, the matter is not to be referred  to  Arbitration
                 at all.

                                                                      ...7/-

                                     :7:
                 3(a)(iv) In cases where the claim is  up  to  Rs.5,00,000/-
                 (Rupees five lakh), the Arbitrator(s) compare so appointed,
                 as the case may be, shall give the  award  on  all  matters
                 referred to arbitration indicating therein break-up of  the
                 sums  awarded  separately  on  each  individual   item   of
                 disputes.   In  cases  where  the  claim   is   more   than
                 Rs.5,00,000/- (Rupees five lakh), the  Arbitrator(s)/Umpire
                 so appointed, as the case may be, shall  give  intelligible
                 award (i.e. the reasoning leading to the  award  should  be
                 stated) with the sums awarded separately on each individual
                 item of dispute referred to arbitration.

                 3(b) For the  purpose  of  appointing  two  arbitrators  as
                 referred to in sub-clause  (a)(ii) above, the Railway  will
                 send a panel of more than three names of  Gazetted  Railway
                 Officers of one of more departments of the Railway  to  the
                 contractor who will be asked  to  suggest  to  the  General
                 Manager one name  out  the  list  for  appointment  as  the
                 contractor's  nominee.   The  General  Manager,  while   so
                 appointment the contractor's nominee, will also  appoint  a
                 second arbitrator as the Railway's nominee either from  the
                 panel or from outside the panel, ensuring that one the  two
                 arbitrators so nominated is invariably  from  the  Accounts
                 Department.  Before entering upon  the  reference  the  two
                 arbitrators  shall  nominate  an  Umpire  who  shall  be  a
                 Gazetted Railway Officer to whom the case will be  referred
                 to  in  the  event  of  any  difference  between  the   two
                 arbitrators Officers of the Junior Administrative grade  of
                 the Accounts Department of the Railways shall be considered
                 as of equal status to  the  Officers  in  the  intermediate
                 administrative grade of other departments  of  the  Railway
                 for the purpose of appointment as arbitrators.”


                                                                      ...8/-
                                     :8:
                 A persual of clause 64 would show that in case  of  claims
           which are below Rs.5,00,000/- (Rupees five  lakh),  the  General
           Manager or a Gazetted Railway Officer nominated by him shall  be
           the sole arbitrator.  In case of claims of Rs.5,00,000/- (Rupees
           five lakh) and above, the Arbitral  Tribunal  shall  consist  of
           three arbitrators to be appointed in terms of  clause  64(3)(b).
           Under clause 64(3)(b), the Railways will send a  panel  of  more
           than three names of Gazetted  Railway  Officers  from  whom  the
           contractor will be  asked  to  suggest  one  name.  The  General
           Manager will appoint the second  arbitrator  on  behalf  of  the
           Railways.  The clause also provided that two  arbitrators  shall
           nominate an Umpire who shall be a Gazetted Railway Officer.

                 Since the Arbitration Act, 1940 had been repealed  by  the
           Arbitration Act, 1996 the provision in the arbitration agreement
           for appointment of two arbitrators  and  an  Umpire  had  become
           redundant. Accordingly, the respondent requested the Railways to
           appoint the sole  arbitrator.   Since  the  Railways  failed  to
           appoint the arbitrator within 30 days of
                                                                      ...9/-

                                     :9:
           the receipt of  the  letter  dated  30th  September,  1996,  the
           respondent moved the application  under  Section  11(6)  of  the
           Arbitration Act, 1996 for appointment of a  sole  arbitrator  on
           3rd January, 1997 before the High Court. As  noticed  above,  by
           order dated 10th  July,  1998,  the  High  Court  appointed  Mr.
           Justice  Satyabrata  Mitra  as  the  sole  arbitrator.   It   is
           important to notice that this order dated 10th  July,  1998  was
           not challenged by the appellant and, therefore, the same  became
           final and binding.  This apart, the appellant  failed  to  raise
           any objection to  the  lack  of  jurisdiction  of  the  Arbitral
           Tribunal before the learned arbitrator.  As noticed  above,  the
           appellant not only filed  the  statement  of  defence  but  also
           rasied a  counter  claim  against  the  respondent.   Since  the
           appellant  has  not  raised  the  objection   with   regard   to
           competence/jurisdiction of  the  Arbitral  Tribunal  before  the
           learned arbitrator, the same is deemed to have  been  waived  in
           view of the provisions contained in Section 4 read with  Section
           16 of the Arbitration Act, 1996.
                                                                     ...10/-

                                    :10:
 Section 16 of the Arbitration Act, 1996 provides that  the
           Arbitral Tribunal may rule on its own jurisdiction.  Section  16
           clearly recognizes the principle of kompetenz-kompetenz. Section
           16(2) mandates that a plea that the Arbitral Tribunal  does  not
           have jurisdiction shall be raised not later than the  submission
           of the statement of defence.  Section 4 provides  that  a  party
           who knows that any requirement under the  arbitration  agreement
           has not been complied with and yet proceeds with the arbitration
           without stating his objection  to  such  non-compliance  without
           undue delay shall be deemed to  have  waived  his  right  to  so
           object.

                 In our opinion, the High Court has correctly come  to  the
           conclusion that the appellant having failed to raise the plea of
           jurisdiction before the Arbitral Tribunal cannot be permitted to
           raise for the first time in the Court.  Earlier also, this Court
           had occasion to consider a similar objection in  Bharat  Sanchar
           Nigam Limited and another versus Motorola India Private  Limited
           [(2009) 2  SCC  337].   Upon  consideration  of  the  provisions
           contained in Section 4 of the Arbitration Act, 1996, it has been
           held as follows:
                                                                     ...11/-

                                    :11:
                   39.   Pursuant to  section  4  of  the  Arbitration  and
                   Conciliation Act, 1996,  a  party  which  knows  that  a
                   requirement under the arbitration agreement has not been
                   complied with and still proceeds  with  the  arbitration
                   without raising  an  objection,  as  soon  as  possible,
                   waives  their  right  to  object.  The  High  Court  had
                   appointed an arbitrator  in  response  to  the  petition
                   filed by the appellants (sic respondent). At this point,
                   the matter was closed unless further objections were  to
                   be raised. If further objections were to be  made  after
                   this order, they should have  been  made  prior  to  the
                   first arbitration hearing. But the  appellants  had  not
                   raised any such objections. The appellants therefore had
                   clearly failed  to  meet  the  stated    requirement  to
                   object to arbitration without delay. As such their right
                   to object is deemed to be waived.
                 In our opinion, the obligations are  fully  applicable  to
           the facts of this case.  The appellant is deemed to have  waived
           the right to object with regard to the lack of the  jurisdiction
           of the Arbitral Tribunal.

                                                                     ...12/-

                                    :12:
                 We, therefore, see no merit in the appeal and the same  is
           hereby dismissed.

                 No costs.

                                                     ....................,J.
                                                     (SURINDER SINGH NIJJAR)




                                                     ....................,J.
                                                     (RANJANA PRAKASH DESAI)
           NEW DELHI
           FEBRUARY 18, 2014

