

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
M.D.Orissa S.H.W.Coop.Sty.Ltd vs Satyanarayan Pattnaik & Anr on 11 February, 1947Author: 1 A Dave
Bench: Anil R. Dave, Dipak Misra
                                          NON-REPORTABLE

                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                    CIVIL APPEAL NOs.   1967-68  OF 2014
              (Arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 16165-16166 of 2012)



M.D. ORISSA S.H.W COOP. STY. LTD.       .....Appellant





                                Versus





SATYANARAYAN PATTNAIK & ANR.           …..Respondents





                               J U D G M E N T

1 ANIL R. DAVE, J.

     1. Leave granted.

     2. Heard the learned counsel and perused the impugned  judgment  dated
        14th May, 2010 delivered in W.P.(C) No. 10291  of  2006  and  order
        dated 24th October, 2011 in R.P.No.131 of  2010  delivered  by  the
        High Court of Orissa.

     3. The respondent was an employee, who had submitted  his  application
        for voluntary retirement  under  the  Voluntary  Retirement  Scheme
        dated 9.6.2006 floated by the appellant-employer.  Before the final
        decision in pursuance of the said application was  communicated  by
        the appellant-employer to the respondent-employee, the  respondent-
        employee had made a request for withdrawal of the said  application
        and  ultimately  the  appellant-employer  had  not   accepted   the
        application for withdrawal submitted by the respondent-employee and
        the respondent- employee was made to retire.

     4. In view of the fact that his application for  voluntary  retirement
        was accepted though the respondent-employee wanted to withdraw  the
        same,  the respondent-employee had filed a petition before the High
        Court, which was allowed and the  High  Court,  by  virtue  of  the
        impugned judgment, directed that the respondent-employee should  be
        taken in service within two months with full back wages.  Even  the
        review petition filed by the appellant had  been  rejected  by  the
        High Court.

     5. Keeping the question of law open, looking at the peculiar facts  of
        the case, we feel that the appeal  deserves  to  be  allowed  to  a
        limited extent by directing the appellant-employer to pay only  20%
        of the back wages from the  date  when  the  respondent  ceased  to
        discharge his duties till the date he is reinstated in service.

     6. The respondent shall be reinstated in service within two weeks from
        today.

     7. In view of the above order, the appeals stand disposed of as partly
        allowed with no order as to costs.

                                             ……………………….J.
                                             (ANIL R. DAVE)






                                             ……………………….J.
                                             (DIPAK MISRA)






   New Delhi
   February 11, 2014
-----------------------
3
