

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Sukhvinder Singh vs Union Of India & Ors on 25 June, 1947Bench: Vikramajit Sen, Shiva Kirti Singh
                                                                             REPORTABLE

                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                       CIVIL APPEAL No. 5605  OF 2010


SUKHVINDER SINGH                                      .…..APPELLANT

      Versus

UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                                     …..RESPONDENT


                                  O R D E R

1     This Appeal assails the Order passed by  the  Division  Bench  of  the
High Court of Delhi at New Delhi dated March 30, 2006 whereby WP(C)  No.3923
of 2005 came to be dismissed.   The prayer  in  the  Writ   Petition,  inter
alia, was for the issuance of a writ directing the  respondents  to  release
(a) disability pension in favour of the Petitioner if disability  is  twenty
per cent and above, (b) the service element of  pension  in  favour  of  the
Petitioner and (c) to re-enrol the Petitioner if  his  disability  is  found
less than twenty per cent.
2     Succinctly stated, the facts germane for deciding the  present  Appeal
are that consequent to  the  Primary  Medical  Examination  for  Recruitment
having been conducted vis-a-vis the Appellant/Petitioner on  22nd  December,
2000, he was enrolled in the Indian Army as a   Combatant  Soldier  on  15th
March, 2001.     It bears noting that Rule 5 of the  Entitlement  Rules  for
Casualty Pensionary Awards, 1982, provides that (a) “a member  is   presumed
to have been in sound physical and mental condition  upon  entering  service
except as to  physical  disabilities  noted  or  recorded  at  the  time  of
entrance (b) in the event of his subsequently being discharged from  service
on medical grounds any deterioration in his health which has taken place  is
due to service.”   Even though this provision  postulates  a  ‘casualty’  we
find no logical reason not to extrapolate it  to  even  simple  injuries  or
disabilities.     Therefore, it would be fair to assume that on the date  of
his recruitment the Appellant was in a sound health; no  hearing  impairment
had been detected at that stage, no adverse noting  had  been  made  in  the
Medical Entry Form viz. AFMSF-2 for existence of any disease at the time  of
enrolment.    This was after the Appellant had been examined physically  and
medically as contemplated by Regulation 383 which reads thus:-
“383.Responsibility  of  Recruiting  and   Medical   Officers     Recruiting
officers are responsible for the measurements,  apparent  age,  intelligence
and  mental  suitability  of  the  candidates  selected  by  him.    Medical
Officers are responsible for  the  health,  physical  fitness  for  service,
likely extent of development and identification marks.”

3     We are not a little surprised that although the Rules  or  Regulations
(Chapter VII of the Regulations  for  the  Medical  Services  of  the  Armed
Forces, 1983) specifically postulate the formation of  Invalidation  Medical
Boards, they do not set out the medical parameters justifying  or  requiring
serviceman/officer to  be  removed  from  service.    This  feature  renders
decisions taken by such Boards pregnable  to  assaults  on  the  grounds  of
capriciousness or arbitrariness, and this is especially so where the  extent
of the disability is  below  twenty  per  cent.    Can  the  Authorities  be
permitted to portray that whilst a person has so minor a  disability  as  to
disentitle him for compensation, yet  suffers  from  a  disability  that  is
major  or  serious  enough  to  snatch  away  his  employment?     This   is
especially so since Regulation 132  ordains  that  the  “minimum  period  of
qualifying service (without weightage) actually rendered  and  required  for
earning service pension shall be 15 years.”  Moreover, in the case in  hand,
it appears that no efforts were undertaken by the  Respondents  to  consider
whether  the  Appellant  could  continue  in  service  in  a  lower  medical
category.
4     According to the Appellant, on 5.8.2001 he was slapped on the  ear  by
the Instructor in the Training Centre as a consequence of which he  suffered
shooting pain in that  ear  and  was  admitted  to  the  Military  Hospital,
Kamptee.   We have perused the Report of the Medical  Officer  (ENT),  dated
5.8.2001 which has  been  filed  with  the  Appeal  as  Annexure  P-1.    It
contains a noting to the effect that the Appellant had stated  that  he  was
hit on the ear by a fellow patient in the ward.    The  diagnosis  was  that
there was “Substandard hearing RT ear (old) c Tr  perforation  LT  TM.“   It
seems to us that the discrepancy in the noting as to  the  manner  in  which
the injury was sustained was  because  it  was  inconceivable  for  a  young
recruit to lodge a complaint  against  his  Instructor.   Such  a  complaint
would have had serious implications and an Inquiry under Regulation  520  of
the Regulations of the Army, 1987 would have had to be carried out.
5     On 16.2.2002, the Appellant was presented  before  the  Medical  Board
which recommended that the  Appellant  be  invalided  out  of  service  with
disability of 6 per cent to 10 per cent on account  of  hearing  impairment.
It will bear repetition that the exercise as to whether the Appellant  could
be retained in service in some other category was not  even  thought  of  or
considered or undertaken, in the face of  the  Pension  Regulation  for  the
Army, 1961, Part I, Appendix II (4)  and  (9)  which  postulates  that  “the
claimant shall not be called upon to prove the  conditions  of  entitlement.
He/she shall receive the benefit of any  reasonable  doubt.    This  benefit
shall be given more liberally  to  the  claimants  in  field/afloat  service
cases.”  In its  letter  dated  18th  October,  2004  the  respondents  have
recorded  that  the  Invaliding  Medical  Board  (IMB)  had  considered  the
Appellant’s Invalided Disability (ID) and had concluded it to be:-
      (i)   as neither attributable nor aggravated by Military Service; and
      (ii)  as assessed the degree of disablement of the said disease  at  6
to 10 per cent, permanently for life.

Inexplicably, but very significantly, it has also  been  recorded  that  the
above disability had existed  before  entering  service,  but  had  remained
undetected by the recruiting  Medical  Officer.       It  has  further  been
conveyed to the Appellant by the said letter that as per Regulation  173  of
the Pension Regulations for the Army 1961,  Part-I,  disability  pension  is
granted to an individual on his  invalidment  from  service  only  when  his
disability is viewed as attributable or aggravated by Military  Service  and
is assessed  at 20 per cent or above by  the  competent  Medical  Authority,
and since neither of these two factors was present, the  Appellant  was  not
entitled to grant of disability pension in terms  of  the  said  Regulation.
The said Regulation is reproduced below for ease of reference:-
“173.  Unless  otherwise  specifically   provided   a   disability   pension
consisting of service element and disability element may be  granted  to  an
individual who is invalided out of service on account of a disability  which
is attributable to or aggravated by military service in non-battle  casualty
and is assessed at 20% or over.
173-A.  Individuals who are placed in a lower medical category  (other  than
‘E’) permanently and who are discharged because  no  alternative  employment
in their own trade/category suitable  to their low  medical  category  could
be provided or who are unwilling to accept  the  alternative  employment  or
who  having  retained  in  alternative  employment  are  discharged   before
completion of their engagement, shall be deemed to have been invalided  from
service for the purpose of the entitlement rules laid down  in  Appendix  II
to these Regulations.
Note: The above provision shall also apply to individuals who are placed  in
a low medical category while on  extended  service  and  discharged  on  the
account before the completion of the period of their extension.
The question whether a  disability  is  attributable  to  or  aggravated  by
military service shall be determined under the rule in Appendix II.”

6     We think that it is beyond cavil that a combatant  soldier  is  liable
to be invalided out of service only if his disability  is  20  per  cent  or
above and there is a further finding that he cannot  discharge  duties  even
after being placed in a lower medical category.   We  are  indeed  satisfied
to note that Rule 173 Appendix-II (10) postulates and permits preferment  of
claims even  “where  a  disease  did  not  actually  lead  to  the  member’s
discharge from service but arose within ten years  thereafter.”    We,  just
as every other citizen  of  India,  would  be  extremely  disturbed  if  the
Authorities are perceived  as  being  impervious  or  unsympathetic  towards
members  of  the  Armed  Forces  who  have  suffered  disabilities,  without
receiving any form of recompense or source of sustenance,  since  these  are
inextricably germane to their source of  livelihood.   Learned  Counsel  for
the  respondents  has  failed  to  disclose  any  provision  empowering  the
invaliding out of service of any person whose disability  is  below  20  per
cent.  Indeed, this would tantamount to dismissal of a member of  the  Armed
Forces  without  recourse  to  a  court-martial  which  would  automatically
entitle him to reinstatement.  Regulation 143  envisages  the  ‘Re-Enrolment
of Ex-Servicemen Medically Boarded Out’, where the disability is  reassessed
to be below 20 per cent.    It is, therefore, self contradictory to  contend
that the invaliding out of service of the Appellant  was  justified  despite
his disability being of trivial proportions having been adjudged  between  6
to 10 per cent  only.    We  shall  presume,  albeit  fortuitously  for  the
Respondents, that  re-assessment  of  the  Appellant’s  disability  was  not
required to be performed because it was found to be permanent.    Otherwise,
there would be  a  facial  non-compliance  with  Regulation  143,  which  is
extracted below for ease of reference:-
“143.Re-Enrolment of Ex-Servicemen Medically Boarded  Out._(a)Ex-Servicemen,
who are in receipt of disability pension,  will  not  be  accepted  for  re-
enrolment in the Army.
(b)   Ex-Servicemen, medically boarded out without  any  disability  pension
or those whose disability  pensions  have  been  stopped  because  of  their
disability having been re-assessed below 20% by the Re-Survey  Boards,  will
be  eligible  for  re-enrolment,  either  in  combatant   or   non-combatant
(enrolled) capacity in the Army, provided they are re-medically boarded  and
declared fit by the medical authorities.   If such an ex-serviceman  applies
for re-enrolment and claims that he is entirely  free  from  the  disability
for which invalided, he will be medically examined by the Rtg MO and  if  he
considers him fit, the applicant will be advised  to  apply  to  officer-in-
charge,  Records  Office  concerned,  through  the  recruiting  officer  for
getting  himself  re-medically  boarded.   The  officer-in-charge,   Records
Office concerned, on receipt  of  the  application,  will  arrange  for  his
medical  examination  at  a  Military  Hospital  nearest  to  his  place  of
residence.   The individual concerned will have to  pay  all  his  expenses,
including that on accommodation  and  journey  to  and  from  the  place  of
medical examination.
      If the individual is found fit and re-enrolled on regular  engagement,
he will be enlisted for the full  period  of  combined  colour  and  reserve
service, subject to the following conditions:-
      (i)   If he had not previously completed the minimum period of  colour
service after which he could be transferred to the reserve, he  will  rejoin
the colours and his previous colour service will count towards  the  minimum
service required for transfer to the reserve.
      (ii)  If he had previously completed  the  minimum  period  of  colour
service required for transfer to  the  reserve  and  is  fully  trained  and
suitable in all other respects, he may be re-enrolled,  provided  a  vacancy
in the reserve exists, and be immediately transferred to the reserve.
(c)   The counting of former service for pension or gratuity is governed  by
the provisions of Pension Regulations.”

7     The  next  submission  on  behalf  of  the  respondents  is  that  the
injury/disability sustained by the Appellant  is  neither  attributable  nor
aggravated by Military  Service,  thereby  disentitling  him  for  grant  of
disability pension.    We must  draw  an  adverse  presumption  against  the
respondents, inasmuch as no impairment in the Appellant’s hearing  had  been
detected at the time when he  was  enrolled  on  15.3.2001,  pursuant  to  a
complete physical check up.   In fact, an adverse presumption is  postulated
in Appendix II (supra).    In our opinion,  the  version  of  the  Appellant
that injury was sustained by him as a result of his having been  slapped  by
his Instructor, or for that matter by any other Combatant, has  credibility.
  We had already adverted to  the  Confidential  Medical  Report  dated  5th
August, 2001 which specifically contains a mention of the  Appellant  having
been assaulted.    In the circumstances, we cannot  but  conclude  that  the
injury  was  ‘either  attributable  or  aggravated  by  Military   Service’.
Having undergone a thorough medical examination only one year prior  to  the
incident, had the injury or disability been congenital or been in  existence
at  the  time  of  recruitment,  it  would  have   been   duly   discovered.
Therefore, on both counts viz. disability to the extent of less than 20  per
cent, as well as  it  having  been  occurred  in  the  course  of   Military
Service, the findings have to be in favour of the Appellant.
8     Paragraph 183 of the Pension Regulations for the Army  1961,  (Part-I)
stipulates as under:-
“183.  The disability pension consists of two elements viz. Service  element
and disability element which shall be assessed as under:
(1)   Service element …..
(2)   Disability element …..
……………………..
In case where an individual is invalidated out of service before  completion
of his prescribed engagement/service limit on account  of  disability  which
is attributable to or aggravated by military service and is  assessed  below
20 percent, he will  be  granted  an  award  equal  to  service  element  of
disability pension determined in the manner given in Regulation 183  Pension
Regulations for the Army Part-I(1961). ”

9.    We are of the persuasion, therefore, that firstly, any disability  not
recorded at the time of recruitment must be presumed  to  have  been  caused
subsequently and unless proved to  the  contrary  to  be  a  consequence  of
military service.  The benefit of doubt is rightly  extended  in  favour  of
the member of the Armed Forces; any other conclusion would be tantamount  to
granting  a  premium  to  the  Recruitment  Medical  Board  for  their   own
negligence.   Secondly, the morale of the  Armed  Forces  requires  absolute
and undiluted protection and if an injury leads to loss of  service  without
any recompense, this morale would be severely  undermined.   Thirdly,  there
appears to be no provisions authorising the discharge or invaliding  out  of
service where the disability is below twenty per cent and seems to us to  be
logically  so.    Fourthly,  wherever  a  member  of  the  Armed  Forces  is
invalided out of service, it perforce has to be assumed that his  disability
was found to  be  above  twenty  per  cent.   Fifthly,  as  per  the  extant
Rules/Regulations, a disability leading to invaliding out of  service  would
attract the grant of fifty per cent disability pension.
10.   In view of our analysis,  the  Appellant  would  be  entitled  to  the
Disability Pension.   The Appeal is,  accordingly,  accepted  in  the  above
terms.    The pension along with the arrears be disbursed to  the  Appellant
within three months from today.
11.   As there is no representation on behalf of the Appellant,  a  copy  of
this Order be dispatched to the Appellant  at  the  given  address.    There
will be no order as to costs.

............................................J.
                                          [VIKRAMAJIT SEN]



............................................J.
                                          [SHIVA KIRTI SINGH]
New Delhi
June 25,  2014.
-----------------------
11
