

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Tapash Kumar Paul vs Bsnl & Anr on 28 January, 1947Author: ...........................J.
Bench: Gyan Sudha Misra, V. Gopala Gowda
                                                                             REPORTABLE


                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                        CIVIL APPEALLATE JURISDICTION


                        CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4980 OF 2014
                 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 15357 of 2013)






TAPASH KUMAR PAUL                              ....  Petitioner(s)

                          VERSUS

BSNL & ANR.                                    ....  Respondent(s)

                                  O R D E R

                  Leave granted.
                  This appeal  has  been  preferred  by  the  appellant  who
    succeeded in getting an order of reinstatement  in  his  favour  by  the
    Central Government Industrial Tribunal at Calcutta in Reference  No.  27
    of 1997 dated 13th May, 2002, by which the order  of  reinstatement  was
    passed in his favour.  However, the  Tribunal  declined  to  grant  back
    wages to the appellant except Rs.20,000/- to be paid by  the  respondent
    as compensation towards back  wages.   This  Award  was  passed  by  the
    Tribunal since the Management had failed to produce  relevant  documents
    to disclose the actual number of days for which appellant has worked and
    so his termination was held to be in violation of  Section  25F  of  the
    Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
                  The respondent-Management of the BSNL,  however,  appealed
    against the Award passed by the Tribunal by way of a  Writ  Petition  in
    the High Court before the Single Judge whereby the learned Single  Judge
    affirmed the Award passed by the
                                     -2-
    Tribunal and dismissed  the  writ  petition  filed  by  the  respondent-
    Management.  The respondent was not satisfied with the order  passed  by
    the Single Judge and refused to give effect to the Award  in  favour  of
    the appellant and preferred a further appeal before the Division  Bench.

                  The Division Bench, however,  was  pleased  to  allow  the
    appeal by setting aside the Award passed in favour of the appellant  and
    in lieu of reinstatement, passed an order directing that the  amount  of
    Rs.20,000/- be paid by way of compensation to the appellant which in any
    case had been passed by the Tribunal as compensation towards back wages.
     Thus, in effect, the compensation which has been ordered to be paid was
    legally due to the appellant towards back wages and the High  Court  set
    aside the entire Award passed by the Tribunal which  in  effect  can  be
    construed that no amount was paid by way of compensation.  Although  the
    High Court recorded that Rs.20,000/- be paid by way of compensation,  as
    aforesaid,  the same was towards back wages as per the Award  passed  by
    the Tribunal.
                  It is no doubt  true  that  a  Court  may  pass  an  order
    substituting an order of reinstatement by awarding compensation but  the
    same has to be based on justifiable grounds viz. (I) where the  industry
    is closed; (ii) where the employee has superannuated or going to  retire
    shortly and no period  of service is left to his credit; (iii) where the
    workman has been rendered incapacitated  to  discharge  the  duties  and
    cannot be reinstated and / or (iv) when he has lost confidence of the
                                     -3-
    Management to discharge duties.  What is sought to be emphasised is that
    there may be appropriate case on facts which  may  justify  substituting
    the order of reinstatement by award of compensation, but that has to  be
    supported by some legal and justifiable reasons indicating why the order
    of reinstatement should  be  allowed  to  be  substituted  by  award  of
    compensation.
                  In the instant matter,  we  are  not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant's  case  falls  in  to  any  of  the  categories  referred  to
    hereinbefore which would justify compensation in lieu of  reinstatement.
    We thus find no justification for the High Court so as to interfere with
    the Award passed by the Tribunal which was affirmed even by  the  Single
    Judge, but the Division Bench thought it appropriate to  set  aside  the
    order of reinstatement without specifying any reasons whatsoever, as  to
    why it substituted with compensation of a meagre amount  of  Rs.20,000/-
    to the appellant.
                  In view of this we set aside the judgment and order of the
    High Court and restore the Award of the Tribunal and the  order  of  the
    Single Judge affirming the same.
                  The appeal accordingly is allowed but without cost.

                                               ...........................J.
                                                          (GYAN SUDHA MISRA)






    NEW DELHI;
    JANUARY 28, 2014
                                                                  REPORTABLE


                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                        CIVIL APPEALLATE JURISDICTION


             CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4980 OF 2014
                 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 15357 of 2013)




TAPASH KUMAR PAUL                           ....  APPELLANT

                          VERSUS

BSNL & ANR.                                 ....  RESPONDENTS

                                  O R D E R


V. Gopala Gowda, J. (Concurring)

1.       While concurring with  the  finding  and  reasons  recorded  by  my
sister Justice Gyan Sudha Misra in allowing  the  Civil  Appeal  by  setting
aside the impugned judgment of the High Court of Calcutta and restoring  the
award  of  the  Labour  Court  with  consequential  benefits   of   awarding
backwages, I am giving my additional reasons after distinguishing  decisions
of this Court upon which reliance has been  placed  by  the  learned  senior
counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant.
2.       The learned counsel on behalf of the  respondent  has  relied  upon
the decision of this Court in the case of  Senior  Superintendent  Telegraph
(Traffic), Bhopal v. Santosh Kumar Seal and Others[1]  to  contend  that  in
the last few years it has been consistently held by this Court  that  relief
by way of reinstatement with  back  wages  is  not  automatic  even  if  the
termination of employee has been found illegal or  is  in  contravention  to
the prescribed procedure. The learned counsel has further  relied  upon  the
Santosh Kumar Seal’s judgment (supra) which hold as under:
        “10. In a recent judgment authored by one of us (R.M. Lodha, J.) in
        Jagbir Singh v. Haryana State Agriculture Mktg.  Board  &  Anr.[2],
        the aforesaid decisions were noticed and it was stated:

             7. It is true that the earlier view of this  Court  articulated
             in many decisions reflected the  legal  position  that  if  the
             termination of an employee was found to be illegal, the  relief
             of reinstatement with full back wages would ordinarily  follow.
             However, in recent past, there has been a shift  in  the  legal
             position  and  in  a  long  line  of  cases,  this  Court   has
             consistently taken the view that relief by way of reinstatement
             with  back  wages  is  not  automatic   and   may   be   wholly
             inappropriate  in  a  given  fact  situation  even  though  the
             termination  of  an  employee  is  in  contravention   of   the
             prescribed procedure. Compensation instead of reinstatement has
             been held to meet the ends of justice.
                               *    *        *
             14. It would be, thus, seen that by a catena  of  decisions  in
             recent time, this Court has clearly laid down that an order  of
             retrenchment passed in violation of Section 25-F  although  may
             be set aside but an award of reinstatement should not, however,
             be automatically passed. The award of reinstatement  with  full
             back wages in a case where the workman has completed  240  days
             of  work  in  a  year  preceding  the  date   of   termination,
             particularly, daily wagers has not been found to be  proper  by
             this Court and instead  compensation  has  been  awarded.  This
             Court has distinguished between a daily wager who does not hold
             a post and a permanent employee.”



The learned senior counsel has further relied  upon  the  decision  of  this
Court in Civil Appeal No.107 of 2014 titled BSNL & Ors. Vs. Kailash  Narayan
Sharma to hold that reinstatement  may  not  be  a  natural  consequence  of
termination of service of a work in contravention to Section 25 F of the  ID
Act. The relevant para reads as under:

           “The decisions of this Court referred to above, in no  uncertain
           terms hold that in case of termination in violation  of  Section
           25-F of the I.D. Act, relief of reinstatement  may  not  be  the
           natural  consequence.   It  will  depend  upon  the  facts   and
           circumstances of each case.   It is not automatic.  In the facts
           of a given case, instead of reinstatement, monetary compensation
           can be granted.   The cases in  hand  clearly  fall  within  the
           ratio of the decisions of this Court, referred to above.”


3.       However, it is pertinent to mention that  the  recent  decision  of
this Court in the case of Deepali Gundu Surwase v.  Kranti  Junior  Adhyapak
Mahavidyalaya (D.Ed) and Ors.[3] took a contrary view.  The  Court  in  this
case, opined as under:
       “22. The very idea of restoring an employee to the position which he
       held before dismissal or removal or termination of  service  implies
       that the employee will be put in the same position in which he would
       have been but for the illegal action  taken  by  the  employer.  The
       injury suffered by a person, who  is  dismissed  or  removed  or  is
       otherwise terminated from service cannot easily be measured in terms
       of money. With the passing of an  order  which  has  the  effect  of
       severing the employer-employee relationship, the latter’s source  of
       income gets dried up. Not  only  the  employee  concerned,  but  his
       entire family suffers grave adversities. They are  deprived  of  the
       source of sustenance. The children are deprived of  nutritious  food
       and all opportunities of  education  and  advancement  in  life.  At
       times, the family  has  to  borrow  from  the  relatives  and  other
       acquaintance to avoid starvation. These sufferings continue till the
       competent adjudicatory forum decides on the legality of  the  action
       taken by the employer. The reinstatement of such an employee,  which
       is preceded by a finding of  the  competent  judicial/quasi-judicial
       body or court that the action taken by the employer is  ultra  vires
       the relevant statutory  provisions  or  the  principles  of  natural
       justice, entitles the employee to claim  full  back  wages.  If  the
       employer wants to deny back wages to the  employee  or  contest  his
       entitlement to get consequential benefits, then it is for him/her to
       specifically plead and prove that during the intervening period  the
       employee was gainfully employed and was getting the same emoluments.
       The denial of back wages to an employee, who has suffered due to  an
       illegal act of the employer would amount to indirectly punishing the
       employee concerned and rewarding the employer by  relieving  him  of
       the obligation to pay back wages including the emoluments.

       23. A somewhat similar issue was considered by a  three-Judge  Bench
       in Hindustan Tin Works (P) Ltd. v. Employees of  M/s  Hindustan  Tin
       Works Pvt. Ltd. & Ors.[4] in the context of termination of  services
       of  56  employees  by  way  of  retrenchment  due  to  alleged  non-
       availability of the raw material necessary for utilisation  of  full
       installed capacity by the petitioner.  The  dispute  raised  by  the
       employees resulted in award of reinstatement with full  back  wages.
       This Court examined the issue at length and held:

             “It is no more open to debate that in the field  of  industrial
             jurisprudence a declaration can be given that  the  termination
             of service is bad and the workman continues to be  in  service.
             The spectre of common law doctrine that  contract  of  personal
             service cannot be specifically  enforced  or  the  doctrine  of
             mitigation of damages does not haunt in this branch of law. The
             relief of reinstatement  with  continuity  of  service  can  be
             granted where termination of service is found to be invalid. It
             would mean that the employer has taken away illegally the right
             to work of the workman contrary  to  the  relevant  law  or  in
             breach of contract and simultaneously deprived the  workman  of
             his earnings. If thus the employer is found to be in the  wrong
             as a result of which the workman is directed to be  reinstated,
             the employer could not shirk his responsibility of  paying  the
             wages which the workman has been deprived of by the illegal  or
             invalid action of the employer. Speaking  realistically,  where
             termination of service is questioned as invalid or illegal  and
             the workman has to go through  the  gamut  of  litigation,  his
             capacity  to  sustain   himself   throughout   the   protracted
             litigation is itself such an awesome factor  that  he  may  not
             survive to see the day when relief is granted. More so  in  our
             system where the law’s proverbial delay has become  stupefying.
             If after such a protracted time and energy consuming litigation
             during  which  period  the  workman  just   sustains   himself,
             ultimately he is to be told that though he will be  reinstated,
             he will be denied the back wages which would be due to him, the
             workman would be subjected to a sort of penalty for no fault of
             his and it  is  wholly  undeserved.  Ordinarily,  therefore,  a
             workman whose service has been illegally  terminated  would  be
             entitled to full  back  wages  except  to  the  extent  he  was
             gainfully employed during the enforced idleness.  That  is  the
             normal  rule.  Any  other  view  would  be  a  premium  on  the
             unwarranted  litigative  activity  of  the  employer.  If   the
             employer terminates the service illegally and  the  termination
             is motivated as in this  case  viz.  to  resist  the  workmen’s
             demand for revision of wages, the termination may  well  amount
             to unfair labour practice. In such circumstances  reinstatement
             being the normal rule, it should be  followed  with  full  back
             wages. Articles 41 and 43 of the Constitution would  assist  us
             in reaching a just conclusion in this respect.  By  a  suitable
             legislation, to wit, the U.P. Industrial  Disputes  Act,  1947,
             the State has endeavoured to secure work  to  the  workmen.  In
             breach of the statutory obligation the services were terminated
             and the termination is found to be invalid; the workmen  though
             willing to do the assigned work and earn their livelihood, were
             kept  away  therefrom.  On  top  of  it  they  were  forced  to
             litigation up to the Apex Court now they are  being  told  that
             something less than full back wages should be awarded to  them.
             If the services were  not  terminated  the  workmen  ordinarily
             would have continued to work and would have earned their wages.
             When it was held that the termination of services  was  neither
             proper nor justified, it would not only show that  the  workmen
             were always willing to serve but if they rendered service  they
             would legitimately be entitled to the wages for  the  same.  If
             the workmen were always ready to work but they were  kept  away
             therefrom on account of an invalid act of the  employer,  there
             is no justification for not awarding them full back wages which
             were very legitimately due to them.

                       *  *        *


             In the very nature of things there  cannot  be  a  straitjacket
             formula  for  awarding  relief  of  back  wages.  All  relevant
             considerations will enter the verdict. More or less,  it  would
             be a motion addressed to the discretion of the  Tribunal.  Full
             back wages would be the normal rule and the party objecting  to
             it must establish the circumstances necessitating departure. At
             that stage the Tribunal will exercise its discretion keeping in
             view all the relevant circumstances. But the discretion must be
             exercised in a judicial and judicious manner.  The  reason  for
             exercising discretion must be cogent and  convincing  and  must
             appear on the  face  of  the  record.  When  it  is  said  that
             something is to be done within the discretion of the authority,
             that something is to be done according to the rules  of  reason
             and justice, according to law and not humour. It is not  to  be
             arbitrary, vague and fanciful but legal and regular.”
                          (emphasis supplied)


       After  enunciating  the  abovenoted  principles,  this  Court   took
       cognizance of the appellant’s plea that  the  company  is  suffering
       loss and, therefore, the workmen  should  make  some  sacrifice  and
       modified the award of full back wages by directing that the  workmen
       shall be entitled to 75% of the back wages.

       24. Another three-Judge Bench considered the same issue in  Surendra
       Kumar Verma & Ors. v. Central  Government  Industrial  Tribunal-cum-
       Labour Court, New Delhi & Anr.[5] and observed:

             “… Plain common sense dictates that the  removal  of  an  order
             terminating the services of workmen must ordinarily lead to the
             reinstatement of the services of the workmen. It is as  if  the
             order has never been, and so it must ordinarily  lead  to  back
             wages too. But there may  be  exceptional  circumstances  which
             make it impossible or wholly inequitable vis-à-vis the employer
             and workmen to direct reinstatement with full back  wages.  For
             instance, the industry might have closed down or  might  be  in
             severe financial doldrums; the  workmen  concerned  might  have
             secured better or other employment elsewhere and so on. In such
             situations, there is a vestige of discretion left in the  court
             to make appropriate consequential orders. The  court  may  deny
             the relief of reinstatement where reinstatement  is  impossible
             because the industry has closed down. The court  may  deny  the
             relief of award of full back wages where that  would  place  an
             impossible  burden  on  the  employer.  In   such   and   other
             exceptional  cases  the  court  may  mould  the  relief,   but,
             ordinarily the relief to be awarded must be reinstatement  with
             full back wages. That relief must be awarded where  no  special
             impediment in the way of awarding the relief is clearly  shown.
             True, occasional hardship may be caused to an employer  but  we
             must remember that, more  often  than  not,  comparatively  far
             greater hardship is certain to be caused to the workmen if  the
             relief is  denied  than  to  the  employer  if  the  relief  is
             granted.”
                           (emphasis supplied)

Therefore, in the light of the decision of this  Court  in  Deepali  Gundu’s
case (supra) which has correctly relied upon higher bench decisions of  this
Court in Surendra Kumar Verma’s case (supra) and Hindustan  Tin  Works  Pvt.
Ltd. (supra), I am of the opinion that the appellant herein is  entitled  to
reinstatement with full back wages since in the absence of full back  wages,
the employee will be distressed and will suffer punishment for no  fault  of
his own.
4.       The Division Bench of the High Court has gravely erred in law  that
the  Tribunal  and  learned  single  Judge  found  that  the  order  of  the
termination is bad in  law  for  non-compliance  with  the  above  statutory
provisions of the ID Act and therefore, following the normal Rule  of  Award
of reinstatement is awarded but erroneously denied full back  wages  in  the
absence of proof of gainful employment of appellant-workman.
5.       For the foregoing additional reasons,  the  impugned  judgment  and
order of the Division Bench is set aside and the Award of the  Tribunal  and
the  order  of  the  learned  single  Judge  are  restored.  The  appeal  is
accordingly allowed, but without costs.

                                               ...........................J.
                                             (V. GOPALA GOWDA)

New Delhi,
January 28, 2014








                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                        CIVIL APPEALLATE JURISDICTION


             CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4980 OF 2014
                 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 15357 of 2013)




TAPASH KUMAR PAUL                           ....  APPELLANT

                          VERSUS

BSNL & ANR.                                 ....  RESPONDENTS

                                  O R D E R


                  Leave granted.

                  In view of the two orders giving separate reasons,  though
concurring, the appeal is allowed.

                                                  ........................J.
                                                          [GYAN SUDHA MISRA]



                                                  ........................J.
                                                           [V. GOPALA GOWDA]

NEW DELHI;
JANUARY 28, 2014
-----------------------
[1]       (2010) 6 SCC 773
[2]       (2009) 15 SCC 327
[3]        (2013) 10 SCC 324
[4]       (1979) 2 SCC 80
[5]       (1980) 4 SCC 443


