

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Haryana Dairy Dev. Coop. Fed. Ltd vs Jagdish Lal on 13 January, 1947Author: ........................J.
Bench: B.S. Chauhan, J. Chelameswar
                                                                        REPORTABLE

                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                      SLP(CIVIL) NO(s). 39434 OF 2013




      HARYANA DAIRY DEVELOPMENT COOPERATIVE
     FEDERATION LIMITED                            Petitioner(s)


                       VERSUS


      JAGDISH LAL                              Respondent(s)




                             O R D E R

                 Inspite of the fact that the  Parliament  has  amended  the
      Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 altering the provisions of  Section  102
      CPC providing that money recovery suit involving less than Rs. 25,000/-
       shall not be entertained in Second Appeal, we are being burdened with
      cases where the litigation cost may be hundred  times  more  than  the
      amount involved.  It has become the definite attitude of the officials
      not to take any responsibility even for petty issues and  would  waste
      public money approaching this  Court.   Government  departments  would
      spend any amount on litigation instead of paying petty amount  to  the
      other party.  In the instant case, an amount of Rs. 8,724/- is  to  be
      paid to the respondent employee as reimbursement of his medical  claim
      and the petitioner Haryana Dairy  Development  Cooperative  Federation
      Limited treating the litigation as luxury must have spent  the  amount
      already by filing this petition more than the  total  amount  involved
      herein.
                 Many a time this Court has felt unhappy about the  time  of
      the Court being taken  for  days  together  by  petty  matters.   (The
      Constitution  Bench  judgment  Sukhdev  Singh,  Oil  &   Natural   Gas
      Commission, Life Insurance Corporation, Industrial Finance Corporation
      Employees Associations  Vs.  Bhagat  Ram,  Association  of  Class  II,
      Officers, Shyam Lal, Industrial Finance Corporation AIR 1975 SC 1331).

                 In Kadra Pahadiya and Others Vs. State of Bihar AIR 1997 SC
      3750, this Court observed that if the load  of  such  petty  cases  is
      taken out of the regular Courts, those Courts would have time to  deal
      with more serious crimes rather than have their time consumed by  such
      petty cases.

                 The Law  Commission  of  India  in  its  155th  report  has
      observed  that  what  further  agitates  is  the  number  of   pending
      litigations relating to trivial matters or petty claims, some of which
      has been hanging for more than fifteen years.  It hardly needs mention
      that in many such cases money spent on litigation is far in excess  of
      the stakes involved, besides wasting valuable time and energy  of  the
      concerned parties as well as the Court.

                 We direct that the expenses  of  the  litigation  shall  be
      incurred by the Managing Director personally who has signed  affidavit
      in support of the  petition  and  it  shall  not  be  taken  from  the
      Federation.  A copy  of  the  order  be  sent  to  the  learned  Chief
      Secretary of the State of Haryana as well as to the Managing Director.

                 The special leave petition is dismissed.  In  view  of  the
      above, question of law, if any is kept open.

                                        ........................J.
                                        (Dr. B.S. CHAUHAN)




                                        ........................J.
                                        (J. CHELAMESWAR)


      NEW DELHI
      JANUARY 13, 2014.

