

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Dineshan K.K vs R. K. Singh & Anr on 11 March, 1947Author: ....................J.
Bench: H.L. Dattu, S.A. Bobde
           

                                                                  REPORTABLE




                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                         CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION


                    CONTEMPT PETITION (C) NO. 422 OF 2012


                                     IN


                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 25 OF 2008






      |Dineshan K.K.                               |.. Petitioner(s)               |




                                 Versus


      |R.K. Singh & Anr.                           |.. Respondent(s)/              |
|                                            |Contemnors                     |








                                  O R D E R

     1. This contempt  petition  is  filed  by  the  petitioner  inter  alia
        requesting this Court to initiate contempt proceedings  against  the
        respondent Nos. 1 and 2 for alleged disobedience of the judgment and
        order passed by this Court in Civil Appeal No.  25  of  2008,  dated
        04.01.2008.

     2. The High Court while disposing of the writ  petition  filed  by  the
        petitioner herein had issued certain  directions  to  the  Union  of
        India and its officer to re-designate the petitioner from  the  rank
        of Hawaldar (Radio Mechanic) to Warrant Officer  as  recommended  by
        the Ministry of Home affairs and also to extend  the  pay-scales  as
        given to the rank counter parts in the Central Reserve Police  Force
        (CRPF) and Border Security Force (BSF).

     3. Being aggrieved by the order  and  directions  issued  by  the  High
        Court,  the  Union  of  India  and  Anr.  through  their  respective
        officer(s) had filed Civil Appeal No. 25 of 2008 before  this  Court
        inter alia questioning the judgment and order passed  by the Gauhati
        High Court in Writ Petition No. 497 of 2001, dated  11.02.2005.  The
        alleged contemnors herein Mr. R.K. Singh, Secretary,  Government  of
        India and Lt. General  Ranvir  Singh,  Director  General  of  Assam,
        Rifles were the  respondent  Nos.  1  and  2,  respectively  in  the
        aforesaid appeal.

     4. This Court has dismissed the appeal and held as under:

                 "On a conspectus of the factual scenario noted above, we do
                 not find any infirmity in the impugned directions given  by
                 the High Court, warranting interference. There is no  merit
                 in this appeal and it is dismissed accordingly with costs."

     5. The  petitioner  before  us,  being  of  the  view  that  since  the
        contemnors/respondents herein have not complied with the orders  and
        directions issued by the High Court as well  as  by  this  Court  in
        spite of lapse of considerable period of  time  from  the  aforesaid
        judgment and order of this Court and hence willfully  disobeyed  the
        judgment and order of this Court, has filed this  contempt  petition
        under Article 129 of the Constitution of India read with Section  12
        of the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971.

     6. The  respondents  have  entered  appearance  and  also  filed  their
        respective counter affidavits before this Court.

     7.  At  the  time  of  hearing  of  this  contempt  petition,  we  have
        deliberated on two questions: firstly, whether the contempt petition
        filed by the  petitioner  is  maintainable  before  this  Court  and
        secondly, whether the petitioner could approach High Court which has
        disposed of the writ petition and issued certain directions  to  the
        alleged contemnors for the grant of prayer sought before us in  this
        petition.

     8. The learned senior  counsel  for  the  complainant/petitioner,  Shri
        Kumar would bring to our notice the decision of this  Court  in  the
        case of Oil and Natural Gas Corporation  Ltd.  vs.  S.B.I.  Overseas
        Branch, Bombay, (2006) 6 SCC 385 and submit that  the  judgment  and
        order passed by the High Court has now merged with the orders passed
        by this Court when this Court dismissed the civil  appeal  filed  by
        the petitioner and therefore, this Court  has  the  jurisdiction  to
        entertain the present petition as it is  the  order  of  this  Court
        which has been willfully disobeyed by the respondents/contemnors.

     9. We have carefully perused the decision of this Court. A  reading  of
        the judgment would certainly indicate that when  the  civil  appeals
        and the special leave petitions  are  dismissed  with  reasons,  the
        orders passed by the Courts below would merge with the judgment  and
        order passed by this Court. The said decision has been  followed  by
        this Court in a catena of subsequent judgments of this Court.

    10. In view of what has  been  said  by  this  Court  in  the  aforesaid
        decision, we cannot hold that the judgment and order passed  by  the
        High Court has not merged with the judgment and order passed by this
        Court when the civil appeal filed by the complainant/petitioner  was
        dismissed.

    11. The first question having been  answered,  the  next  question  that
        would arise for  our  consideration  and  decision  is  whether  the
        contempt petition requires to be entertained by this Court or  could
        this Court request the High Court whose directions are said to  have
        been disobeyed by the respondents to consider and decide the matter.

    12. We requested Shri K.K. Venugopal and   Dr.  Rajeev  Dhawan,  learned
        senior counsel to assist us in the matter. Their view on the  second
        question is that undoubtedly the order passed by this  Court,  while
        accepting the judgment and order passed by the Courts  below,  would
        merge with the judgment  and  order  passed  by  the  Courts  below.
        However, this Court in exercise of its powers  under  Articles  129,
        136  and  142  of  the  Constitution  of  India  could  direct   the
        complainant/petitioner to approach the High Court and bring  to  its
        notice and knowledge that their  orders  and  directions  have  been
        disobeyed by the respondents/contemnors.

    13. In the instant case, the complainant/petitioner had  approached  the
        High Court for certain reliefs. The High  Court  has  granted  those
        reliefs to the petitioner and while doing  so  the  High  Court  has
        issued  certain direction(s) to the respondents to do  a  particular
        thing in a particular manner. The respondents, namely, the Union  of
        India and other officers  disturbed  by  the  order  and  directions
        issued by the High Court had filed the special leave petition  which
        on grant of leave had converted into civil appeal. This Court  after
        hearing the parties did not find merit in the appeal and  therefore,
        dismissed it.

    14. We are mindful of settled law that the orders  passed  by  the  High
        Court would merge with the order passed by this  Court.  This  Court
        has dismissed the appeal only and, therefore, it is  the  directions
        passed by the High Court which in fact have been allegedly disobeyed
        by the respondents/contemnors. In our considered view, it  would  be
        in the interest of justice and to lessen the burden of this Court in
        the current scenario, it would be appropriate to  request  the  High
        Court to look into the grievance of the complainant, if  a  petition
        is filed before  them  inter  alia  bringing  to  their  notice  and
        knowledge that their orders and directions have been  disobeyed.  In
        our opinion, firstly, this  exercise  would  be  beneficial  to  the
        parties because they were before the High Court in the writ petition
        wherein the directions were issued and secondly, by entertaining the
        petitions of this nature wherein this Court has passed an  order  of
        dismissal simplicitor and the alleged contempt  arises  out  of  the
        order passed by the High Court, this Court would saddle the  dockets
        with cases which could otherwise be effectively could be disposed of
        by the Courts below.

    15. In view of the aforesaid aspects of the matter,  in  our  considered
        opinion, though we hold that when the judgment and order  passed  by
        the High Court has merged with the order passed by this Court  while
        disposing of the civil appeal, we direct the  complainant/petitioner
        to file an appropriate contempt petition before the High  Court  for
        the alleged disobedience of the orders and directions issued by  the
        High Court within two months' time from today.  If such  a  contempt
        petition is filed,  the  High  Court  would  consider  the  same  in
        accordance with law  after  giving  an  appropriate  opportunity  of
        hearing to all the parties concerned.

    16. With these observations, the contempt petition is disposed of.

    17. We clarify that we have not expressed any opinion on the  merits  of
        the contempt petition.

               Ordered accordingly.

                                                      ....................J.
                                                                [H.L. DATTU]





                                                      ....................J.
                                                                [S.A. BOBDE]




      NEW DELHI,
      MARCH 11, 2014.

