

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Pooja Bhatia vs Vishnu Narain Shivpuri & Anr on 10 March, 1947Author: . …………………………………
Bench: P Sathasivam, Ranjan Gogoi
                                                               REPORTABLE
                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA


                       CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                      1

                 CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.  585           OF 2014
              (@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRL) NO. 766 OF 2014)



Pooja Bhatia                                      ....   Appellant (s)

            Versus

Vishnu Narain Shivpuri & Anr.                     ....  Respondent(s)



                                  O R D E R

1)    Heard learned counsel for the parties.

2)    Leave granted.

3)    Against the grant of bail in favour  of  the  Respondent  No.1-accused
viz. Vishnu Narain Shivpuri, the complainant has filed the above appeal.

4)    Respondent No.1 was charged under Sections 342, 326-B and 506  of  the
Indian Penal Code.  The bail application  was  filed  initially  before  the
Sessions Court.  After taking note of all the materials and the  seriousness
of the allegations levelled against him, the  Sessions  Court  rejected  his
bail application.  Thereafter,  he  preferred  an  appeal  before  the  High
Court.  The High Court by the  impugned  order  after  taking  note  of  the
submissions made by both the sides and  considering  the  injury  report  as
well as other factual matrix and  without  expressing  any  opinion  on  the
merits of the case, released Respondent No. 1 (herein) on  bail.   The  said
order is under challenge by the complainant in the present appeal.

5)    By order dated 23.01.2014, this Court issued  notice  to  respondents.
Pursuant to the same,  the  Respondent  No.2-State  viz.  Superintendent  of
Police, Trans Gomti,  Lucknow,  filed  counter  affidavit  highlighting  the
cases between the parties and conduct of the Respondent  No.1-accused  after
grant of bail by the High Court order dated 16.01.2014.  Among  the  various
information, the assertion in paras 12 and 14 of the  counter  affidavit  of
the Superintendent of Police dated 05.02.2014 are  relevant  which  read  as
under:

           “It is submitted that the T-shirt in FIR No. 293/13 was sent for
      examination to the Forensic Science Laboratory, Lucknow.  The chemical
      examination of the t-shirt worn by the complainant/petitioner  at  the
      time of incident confirms the presence of ‘Sulphuric Acid’.
           It is the case of the  answering  respondent  that  vide  report
      No.11 dated 01.02.2004 P.S.  Mahanagar  Lucknow  while  patrolling  at
      Papermill Colony it came to the knowledge that the Respondent No.1,  a
      resident of Papermill Colony, Nishatganj, after being enlarged on bail
      was found telling people in the locality that  he  went  to  jail  for
      throwing Sulphuric Acid on his  wife  namely  Pooja  Bhatia  i.e.  the
      petitioner herein and whenever he will again get a chance, will do the
      same to his wife  in  order  to  damage/cause  injury  to  her  face.”



                                             [Emphasis supplied]




6)    Apart from the above assertion made by the Superintendent  of  Police,
who is a highest police officer of the District, learned  counsel  appearing
on behalf of the respondent-Sate during the course of  hearing  has  brought
to our notice the order passed by  the  Additional  City  Magistrate  (5th),
Lucknow in Case No. 107/2014 under Section 110G of Cr.P.C. which shows  that
pursuant to the action of the Respondent No.1 as revealed  in  report  dated
15.02.2014,  the  above  proceedings  were  initiated  and   the   following
information in the said proceeding dated 19.02.2014 which are  relevant  for
the purpose of disposal of this appeal reads as under:

                       IN THE COURT OF ADDITIONAL CITY
                          MAGISTRATE (5TH), LUCKNOW


                                   CASE NO. 107/2014
                       UNDER SECTON 110G OF CR.P.C.
                            P.S. LUCKNOW CITY
                      STATE VS. VISHNU NARAYAN, SHIVPURAI
                                  CASE fixed on:

                       ORDER UNDER 110/111 OF CRL.P.C.

           It was revealed in the  report  dated  15.02.2014  of  In-charge
      Inspector/SHO, City sent under  Section  110  of  Crl.P.C.  which  was
      received with the approval of C.O., City, that Vishnu Narayan Shivpuri
      S/o. Late Pratap Narayan Shivpuri, P.S.  City  Lucknow  is  a  cunning
      criminal.  Common public is quite  perturbed  and  terrorized  by  his
      criminal acts.  Every day he used to  intimidate  the  common  public,
      because of which witnesses avoids to depose against him.  On the above
      basis, request was made to restrain him on  heavy  security  and  bail
      bond.

           Therefore, I S.K. Mishra, Addl.  City  Magistrate,  5th  Lucknow
      feeling satisfied by above  report  of  In-charge,  Lucknow  P.S.,  do
      hereby direct that he shall appear in my Court on the prescribed  date
      and cite that why should personal bail bond  of  Rs.25,000/-  and  two
      securities of similar amounts be  not  taken  from  him  in  order  to
      maintain peace for a year?

           Order issued today on 19.02.2014 under my signature and seal  of
      the Court.

                                        Sd/- illegible
                                   Addl. City Magistrate (5th)
                                        Lucknow


           Order was read over and explained to the Opp.  Party,  which  is
      acknowledged by him.
                                        Sd/- illegible
                                   Addl. City Magistrate (5th)
                                        Lucknow



7)    Mr. Vivek Tankha,  learned  senior  counsel  appearing  on  behalf  of
Respondent No.1-accused by taking us through various  proceedings  including
the matrimonial disputes and assertions in the  form  of  counter  affidavit
before this Court submitted that there is no valid ground  for  cancellation
of bail at this juncture.

8)    We have considered all the details.

9)    It is useful to refer the principles laid down by this Court  and  the
circumstances when bail granted can be cancelled which  was  highlighted  in
Manjit Prakash and Others vs. Shobha Devi and Another,  (2009)  13  SCC  785
which reads as under:-

      “As stated in Raghubir Singh v. State of Bihar, (1986) 4 SCC  481  the
      grounds  for  cancellation  under  Sections  437(5)  and  439(2)   are
      identical, namely, bail granted under Section 437(1) or (2) or Section
      439(1) can be cancelled where (i) the accused misuses his  liberty  by
      indulging in similar  criminal  activity,  (ii)  interferes  with  the
      course of investigation, (iii) attempts to  tamper  with  evidence  or
      witnesses, (iv) threatens witnesses or indulges in similar  activities
      which would hamper smooth investigation, (v) there  is  likelihood  of
      his fleeing to another country, (vi) attempts to make  himself  scarce
      by going underground or  becoming  unavailable  to  the  investigating
      agency, (vii) attempts to  place  himself  beyond  the  reach  of  his
      surety, etc. These grounds are illustrative  and  not  exhaustive.  It
      must also be remembered that rejection of bail stands on  one  footing
      but cancellation of bail is a harsh order because it  interferes  with
      the liberty of the  individual  and  hence  it  must  not  be  lightly
      resorted to.’

      8. It is, therefore, clear that when a person to whom  bail  has  been
      granted either tries to  interfere  with  the  course  of  justice  or
      attempts to tamper with evidence or witnesses or  threatens  witnesses
      or  indulges  in  similar  activities  which   would   hamper   smooth
      investigation or trial, bail granted can be  cancelled.  Rejection  of
      bail stands on one footing, but cancellation of bail is a harsh  order
      because it takes away the liberty of an individual granted and is  not
      to be lightly resorted to.”






10)   In the light of the above principles and the  assertion  made  by  the
Superintendent of Police in the form  of  counter  affidavit  and  follow-up
action which we have been noted above, we are of the view that  inasmuch  as
throwing acid on the complainant is a serious one though no injury  on  her,
but spit on her T-shirt and it got burnt and  taking  note  of  his  conduct
after the impugned  order  of  the  High  Court  dated  16.01.2014,  we  are
satisfied that the accused is not entitled to continue the benefit of  bail.
 Accordingly, the impugned order of the High Court dated 16.01.2014  is  set
aside and the Respondent No.1-accused is  directed  to  surrender  within  a
period of two weeks from today.

11)   Learned Trial Judge is  directed  to  take  all  endeavour  for  early
completion of the trial preferably within a period of six  months  from  the
date of receipt of copy of this order.

12)   The appeal is allowed on the above terms.

                                                           …………………………………CJI.

                                         (P. SATHASIVAM)




                                        ................J.
                                   (RANJAN GOGOI)
NEW DELHI;
10TH MARCH, 2014

-----------------------
6
