

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
State Of Jharkhand & Ors vs M/S. La Opala R.G. Ltd on 27 March, 1947Author: .....................J.
Bench: H.L. Dattu, S.A. Bobde
           REPORTABLE


                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                        CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2240 OF 2006


STATE OF JHARKHAND & ORS.         ..APPELLANTS


                                   VERSUS

M/S.LA OPALA R.G. LTD.            ..RESPONDENT


                                  O R D E R

           1. This appeal is directed against the judgment and order passed
              by the High Court of Jharkhand at Ranchi in W.P. [T]  No.4572
              of 2004, dated  22.06.2005.  By  the  impugned  judgment  and
              order, the High Court has set aside the letter issued by  the
              Assistant Commissioner of Commercial Taxes,  Deogarh  Circle,
              dated  13.05.2004,  whereby  the  Assessing   Authority   has
              rejected the  stand  of  the  respondent-dealer  that  it  is
              eligible to pay reduced rate of tax  under  the  notification
              S.O. No.25 (for short,  “the  notification”)  issued  by  the
              Government of Jharkhand, dated 25.06.2001  and  directed  the
              respondent-dealer to deposit taxes in relation to inter-State
              sales at the rate of 4%.

           2. The  possible  construction  that  could  be  placed  on  the
              aforesaid notification is the subject matter of this appeal.

           3. The conspectus of facts is: the respondent-dealer is a Public
              Limited Company incorporated  under  the  provisions  of  the
              Companies Act, 1956 engaged in the manufacture of  glass  and
              glassware made of Opal glass.  The  industrial  unit  of  the
              respondent-dealer  is  situated  at   Madhupur   in   Deoghar
              district, Jharkhand.

           4. The  respondent-dealer  is  a  dealer  registered  under  the
              provisions of the Bihar Finance Act,  1981  and  the  Central
              Sales Tax Act, 1956 (“the Act”, for short).

           5. The State Government, in exercise of its powers under  clause
              (b) of sub-section 5 of Section 8 of the Act has  issued  the
              notification. Since the construction of the  notification  is
              in issue, we deem it appropriate to extract the notification.
              It reads as under:

       “S.O.25, dated the 25th June,  2001  –  In  exercise  of  the  powers
       conferred by clause (b) of sub-section  (5)  of  Section  8f  of  the
       Central Sales Tax  Act,  1956  (Act  74  of  1958)  the  Governor  of
       Jharkhand is pleased to direct that tax payable under sub-section (1)
       or (2) of Section 8 of the said Act in respect of Sale of  all  types
       of glass and glass  sheets  in  the  course  of  interstate  sale  or
       commerce from any place of business in the State of  Jharkhand  shall
       be calculated at the rate of three per centum and no  statutory  form
       in this regard shall be required.

       2.   This notification shall come into force with  effect  from  16th
       June, 2001.”


           6.  Immediately  after  issuance  of   the   notification,   the
              respondent-dealer by letter dated 27.05.2002 had informed the
              authorities under the Act, that, since the  respondent-dealer
              would be covered by the notification, the rate of tax payable
              on glassware in inter-state sales would  be  at  the  reduced
              rate of 3%. Unfortunately, the authorities did not respond to
              the request so made by the dealer.

           7. Later, the authorities issued a letter  dated  09.01.2004  to
              the respondent manufacturer, inter  alia,  directing  him  to
              deposit the tax in relation to its transactions in respect of
              the inter-state sales to registered and unregistered  dealers
              at the rate of 4% and 12%, respectively. The  respondent  was
              also directed  to  show-cause  as  to  why  a  penalty  under
              Sections 16 and 16(9) of the Bihar Finance Act, 1981 and  the
              Act should not be imposed and the respondent not be  directed
              to correct the returns and deposit tax at the rate of 4%,  if
              the sales is effected to registered dealers and at  the  rate
              of 12% if the inter-state sale is effected  to  un-registered
              dealers.

           8. The respondent-dealer had filed its reply, dated  16.01.2004,
              wherein it took the stand that it was liable  to  charge  and
              deposit tax at the rate of 3 per cent on sale in  the  course
              of inter-state trade in respect of  its  products;  that  the
              returns had been correctly filed and that the tax was validly
              deposited at the rate of 3 per cent.

           9. After  the  issuance  of  the  aforesaid  letter/notice,  the
              authorities by their letter dated  13.05.2004,  rejected  its
              stand and informed that the respondent would be liable to pay
              tax at the rate of 4 per cent on  its  inter-state  sales  if
              made to a registered dealer and at the rate of 12 per cent if
              made to an unregistered dealer.

          10.  Further,  the  respondent-assessee  was  informed   by   the
              authorities that the product manufactured by him is glassware
              and, therefore, not covered under the notification by  letter
              dated 13.07.2004.

          11. The respondent-dealer, being aggrieved by the  communications
              dated 09.01.2004, 13.05.2004 and 13.07.2004 had filed a  Writ
              Petition before the High Court, inter  alia,  requesting  the
              Court to issue a writ in the nature of  certiorari  to  quash
              the aforesaid letters and direct the  authorities  under  the
              Act to extend the benefit of the notification, which has come
              into force with effect from 16.06.2001.

          12. The High Court, after a detailed consideration of  the  issue
              before them, has come to the conclusion  that  the  glassware
              manufactured by the respondent-dealer is a type of glass  and
              therefore, it is entitled to the benefit of reduced  rate  of
              tax under the notification and, accordingly, has quashed  the
              said letters.

          13. Being aggrieved by the said order of the  Division  Bench  of
              the High Court, the State is before us in this appeal.

          14. We have heard Shri Jayesh Gaurav,  learned  counsel  for  the
              appellant-State and Shri S.D. Sanjay, learned senior  counsel
              for the respondent-dealer.  We  have  carefully  perused  the
              documents on record  and  the  judgment  and  order  impugned
              herein.
          15. Shri Gaurav would submit that the expression “types of glass”
              as used in the notification would not include the product  in
              question as it is merely a “form of glass”. He would  provide
              us with some information in respect of types of glasses being
              classified into nine types: 1)Soda glass or soda-lime  glass,
              2)Coloured glass, 3)Plate glass, 4)Safety glass,  5)Laminated
              glass,  6)Optical  glass,  7)Pyrex  glass,  8)Photo-chromatic
              glass, and 9)Lead crystal glass. He would  therefore  contend
              that the product, “glassware” not being any of the  aforesaid
              types of glass  but  another  form  of  glass  would  not  be
              entitled to benefit of the notification  and  that  the  High
              Court has erred in its conclusion.

          16. Per contra, Shri S.D. Sanjay, learned  senior  counsel  would
              justify the judgment and order passed by the High  Court  and
              submit that the products of the respondent-dealer are covered
              by the notification as “glassware” is the  product  in  which
              different components are fused together  to  give  glass  its
              final form in accordance with the moulds in  which  they  are
              manufactured, such as crockery, vases,  etc.  and  therefore,
              would fall in the category of  “types  of  glass”.  He  would
              further submit that in taxing statutes, a notification in the
              nature of  granting  tax  incentives  for  the  promotion  of
              economic  growth  and  development  ought  to  be   liberally
              construed and given a purposive interpretation.

          17. As we have indicated earlier, the short point that falls  for
              our consideration and decision in the case  is  the  possible
              construction that could be placed on the expression “types of
              glass and glass-sheets”  as  contained  in  the  notification
              issued by the State Government  in  exercise  of  its  powers
              under Section 8(5)(b) of the Act.

          18. It is relevant to notice the  contents  of  the  notification
              issued  by  the  State  Government.  A  dissection   of   the
              notification would indicate the following, namely :

        a) the Governor of Jharkhand in exercise of his powers under clause
           (b) of sub-section (5) of Section 8 of the Act  has  issued  the
           notification;

        b) the notification speaks of reduction of the rate  of  tax  under
           the Act;

        c) the reduced rate of tax is from 4% to  3%;

        d) the notification further provides that no  statutory  forms  are
           required for the sale of the types  of  glass  or  glass  sheets
           which are made to the registered dealers under the Act;
        e) if the sales of “all types of glass and glass-sheets”  are  made
           to unregistered dealers then the rate of tax would be at 12  per
           cent.

          19. We do not concur with the proposition put forth by Shri  S.D.
              Sanjay, learned senior  counsel  that  a  notification  which
              grants tax incentives should to  be  liberally  construed  in
              support of his submission. It is settled rule of construction
              of a notification that at the outset a strict approach  ought
              to be adopted in administering whether a dealer/ manufacturer
              is covered by it at all and if the dealer/manufacturer  falls
              within  the  notification,  then  the   provisions   of   the
              notification be liberally construed.

          20.  Literally  speaking,  an  exemption  is  freedom  from   any
              liability, payment of tax or duty. It  may  assume  different
              applications in a growing economy such  as  provisioning  for
              tax holiday to new units, concessional rate of tax  to  goods
              or persons for a limited period under specific conditions and
              therefore, in Union of India v. Wood Papers  Ltd.,  (1990)  4
              SCC 256 this Court  has  observed  that  construction  of  an
              exemption notification or an  exemption  clause  in  contrast
              with the charging provision has to  be  tested  on  different
              touchstone and held that the eligibility clause  in  relation
              to an exemption notification is given strict meaning and  the
              notification has to be interpreted in terms of its  language,
              however, once an assessee satisfies the  eligibility  clause,
              the exemption clause therein may be construed literally. This
              Court has  explained  the  rationale  of  adopting  the  said
              approach as under:

       “4. … In fact an exemption provision is  like  an  exception  and  on
       normal principle of construction or interpretation of statutes it  is
       construed strictly either because  of  legislative  intention  or  on
       economic justification of inequitable burden or progressive  approach
       of fiscal provisions intended to  augment  State  revenue.  But  once
       exception or  exemption  becomes  applicable  no  rule  or  principle
       requires it to be construed  strictly.  Truly  speaking  liberal  and
       strict construction of an exemption provision are to  be  invoked  at
       different stages of interpreting it. When the question is  whether  a
       subject falls in the notification or in the exemption clause then  it
       being in nature of exception is to be construed strictly and  against
       the subject but once ambiguity or doubt about applicability is lifted
       and the subject falls in the notification then full  play  should  be
       given to it and it calls for a wider and liberal construction…”


          21. This Court in Gammon (I) Ltd. v. Commr. of Customs, (2011) 12
              SCC 499 while rejecting the plea of the  appellant  that  the
              exemption notification should receive a liberal  construction
              to further the object underlying it relied upon the  decision
              of a Three-Judge Bench of this Court in Novopan  India  Ltd.,
              which stated the aforesaid principle and  the  object  behind
              adopting literal interpretation  in  determining  eligibility
              for claiming exemption or exception from tax as follows:
       “16. …The principle that in  case  of  ambiguity,  a  taxing  statute
       should be construed in favour of the assessee—assuming that the  said
       principle is good and sound—does not apply to the construction of  an
       exception or an  exempting  provision;  they  have  to  be  construed
       strictly. A person invoking an exception or an exemption provision to
       relieve him of the tax liability must establish clearly  that  he  is
       covered by the said provision. In case of doubt or ambiguity, benefit
       of it must go to the State. This  is  for  the  reason  explained  in
       Mangalore   Chemicals   and   other   decisions   viz.   each    such
       exception/exemption increases the tax burden on other members of  the
       community correspondingly. Once, of course, the  provision  is  found
       applicable to him, full effect must be given to it. As observed by  a
       Constitution Bench of this Court in Hansraj  Gordhandas  v.  CCE  and
       Customs that such a notification has to be interpreted in  the  light
       of the words employed by it and not on any other basis. This  was  so
       held in the context of the principle that in a taxing statute,  there
       is no room for any intendment, that regard must be had to  the  clear
       meaning of the words and that the matter should be governed wholly by
       the language of the notification i.e.  by  the  plain  terms  of  the
       exemption.”
                                                         (emphasis supplied)


          22. In CCE v. Mahaan Dairies this Court has observed that:
       “8.  It  is  settled  law  that  in  order  to  claim  benefit  of  a
       notification, a party must strictly comply  with  the  terms  of  the
       notification. If on wording of the notification the  benefit  is  not
       available then by stretching the words  of  the  notification  or  by
       adding words to the notification benefit cannot be conferred.”



          23. CCE v.  Bhalla  Enterprises  laid  down  a  proposition  that
              notification has to be construed on the basis of the language
              used. A similar view has been expressed by a  Division  Bench
              of this Court in Tata Iron &  Steel  Co.  Ltd.  v.  State  of
              Jharkhand,  Kartar  Rolling  Mills  v.   CCE,   Eagle   Flask
              Industries Ltd. v. CCE, Govt.  of  India  v.  Indian  Tobacco
              Assn., (2005) 7 SCC 396, Collector of Customs (Preventive) v.
              Malwa Industries Ltd., (2009) 12 SCC 735 and CCE  v.  Rukmani
              Pakkwell Traders.

          24.  Having  said  that,  we  would  now  examine   whether   the
              notification would at  all  be  applicable  to  the  sale  of
              product in question.

          25. In the instant  case,  the  State  Government  has  issued  a
              notification and has used the expression “types of glass” and
              not the expression “forms of glass”. Therefore, what requires
              to be examined is whether the two terms would be identical in
              their connotation and import.

          26. It is a settled law that in taxing  statutes  the  terms  and
              expressions must be seen in their common and popular parlance
              and not be attributed their scientific or technical meanings.
              In common parlance, the two words “type” and “form”  are  not
              of the same  import.  According  to  the  Oxford  Dictionary,
              whereas the meaning  of  the  expression  “types”  is  “kind,
              class, breed, group, family, genus”; the meaning of the  word
              “form” is “visible shape or configuration  of  something”  or
              the “style, design, and arrangement in an  artistic  work  as
              distinct from its content”. Similarly, Macmillian  Dictionary
              defines “type” as “a group of people or things  with  similar
              qualities or features that make  them  different  from  other
              groups” and “form” as “the particular way in which  something
              appears or exists  or  a  shape  of  someone  or  something.”
              Therefore, “types” are based on the broad nature of the  item
              intended to be  classified  and  in  terms  of  “forms”,  the
              distinguishable feature is the particular way  in  which  the
              items exist. An example could be the item “wax”. The types of
              wax would include animal, vegetable,  petroleum,  mineral  or
              synthetic wax whereas the  form  of  wax  could  be  candles,
              lubricant wax, sealing wax, etc.

          27. Admittedly, glassware is a form of glass and it is  contended
              by the assessee that forms of glass are also covered  by  the
              said  notification.  The  term  glassware   would   generally
              encompass ornaments, objects and articles  made  from  glass.
              The New Oxford Dictionary, the Merriam-Webster Dictionary and
              the Macmillian Dictionary refer to the said  general  meaning
              while defining it. Glassware would include crockery  such  as
              drinking vessels (drinkware) and tableware and general  glass
              items such as vases,  pots,  etc.  Therefore,  it  cannot  be
              accepted that the expression “types of glass” could have been
              intended to refer to or include “forms of glass”.

          28. In the present case, the respondent-dealer is a  manufacturer
              of glassware.  In  our  considered  view,  the  glassware  so
              manufactured by the respondent-dealer though  made  of  glass
              cannot be considered or called as a “type of glass” in  light
              of the aforesaid discussion and since the  notification  only
              provides for the reduction in the rate of  tax  of  types  of
              glass and not for “forms of glass” which is  manufactured  by
              the respondent as glassware,  the  respondent  would  not  be
              covered by the notification. Keeping that aspect in mind,  we
              hold that the respondent-dealer, a manufacturer  of  articles
              of glass, is not  entitled  to  derive  the  benefit  of  the
              notification  issued   by   the   State   Government,   dated
              25.06.2001. In that view of the matter, we cannot sustain the
              impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court.

          29. In the result,  we  allow  this  appeal  and  set  aside  the
              judgment and order passed by the High Court.

          30. Since the matter was pending for quite some time,  we  direct
              the appellants not  to  levy  penalty  while  recovering  the
              difference of tax payable only for the assessment years 2002-
              2003 to 2005-2006.

      No order as to costs.

      Ordered accordingly.

                                                     .....................J.
                                                                (H.L. DATTU)



                                                     .....................J.
                                                                (S.A. BOBDE)
NEW DELHI;
MARCH 27, 2014.

