

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Municipal Corporation Of ... vs Hyderabad Race Club on 11 November, 1986Equivalent citations: 1987 AIR   92, 1987 SCR  (1) 195
Author: M Thakkar
Bench: Thakkar, M.P. (J)
           PETITIONER:
MUNICIPAL CORPORATION OF HYDERABAD

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
HYDERABAD RACE CLUB

DATE OF JUDGMENT11/11/1986

BENCH:
THAKKAR, M.P. (J)
BENCH:
THAKKAR, M.P. (J)
RAY, B.C. (J)

CITATION:
 1987 AIR   92		  1987 SCR  (1) 195
 1986 SCC  (4) 696	  JT 1986   815
 1986 SCALE  (2)771


ACT:
    Hyderabad Municipal Corporation Act 1955--Section 202(1)
(b)--'Charitable purpose'--Meaning of--User of premises	 for
Race  Course Club--Whether exemption to general	 tax  avail-
able.



HEADNOTE:
    The appellant--Corporation sought to assess the land and
buildings of the respondent club to genera1 tax under s. 202
of  the Hyderabad Municipal Corporation Act, 1955.  The	 re-
spondent claimed exemption on the ground that occupation and
user  of the property for running horse races  and  training
the  horses  etc.  constituted occupation and  user  of	 the
property for a 'charitable purpose' within the meaning of s.
202(1)(b), which was refused. The respondent approached	 the
High Court and succeeded.
Partly allowing the appeal by the Corporation,
    HELD:  1.  For determining whether	exemption  under  s.
202(1) (b) of the Hyderabad Municipal Corporation Act, 1955,
was  available, the test to apply is to seek answer  to	 the
question:  to what use is the property put or for what	pur-
pose  is  the  property pat and to  ascertain  whether	such
occupation or user is for 'charitable purpose'. [197F]
    2.	The  expression 'charitable' in the  context  of  s.
202(1)(b) means a benevolent activity calculated to  benefit
the poor or, the deprived. Horse racing is surely not such a
benevolent activity, however charitable a view is taken.  It
must be the very activity which is carried on  the  property
which  must  be charitable and not the	application  of	 the
income of such activity. [197H- 198A]
    3. The High Court has completely failed to realize	that
the  'occupation'  of the land and buildings or	 the  'user'
must  be for 'charitable purpose' and that it is  altogether
irrelevant as to the manner in which the income of the	club
is  utilised.  Section 202(1)(b) makes no reference  to	 the
question as regards the employment of the income of the club
or  the purpose for which the income is so employed.  Exemp-
tion is granted
196
only  in respect of buildings which are 'solely' and  exclu-
sively used for charitable purpose. [198B]
    4. In the instant case, the user of the premises for the
Race Course Club will not constitute occupation or user	 for
a  'charitable purpose' within the meaning of  s.  202(1)(b)
and of Race Course Club will not be entitled to claim exemp-
tion from levy of the general tax. [198F]
    5.	The High Court has rightly taken a view	 adverse  to
the  appellant as regards the levy for the  assessment	year
1966-67,  on  an appreciation  of evidence and there  is  no
warrant to disturb the said finding. There is also no reason
to  interfere with the valuation of the property as made  by
the  Small  Causes Court and confirmed by  the	High  Court.
[198G-H]
    6. The order passed by the High Court in so far as it is
held  that the property is exempt from levy of	general	 tax
under  s.  202(1)(b) is set aside. The	appellant  would  be
entitled to levy general tax from 1967-68 onwards in accord-
ance with law. [199B]



JUDGMENT:
    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal Nos. 395	 and
1346 (N) of 1973
    From  the  Judgment and Order dated	 13.12.1971  of	 the
Andhra	Pradesh	 High Court in A.A.O. No. 279 and  2  16  of
1970.
    Vepa  P.  Sarthy, B. Parthasarthi and G.N. Rao  for	 the
Appellant.
V.S.  Desai, Naunit Lal and Kailash Vasdev for the  Respond-
ent.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
    THAKKAR,  J.  Believe it or not,  the  most	 incongruous
arguments  can sometimes find a suiter. Were it not so,	 the
High  Court of Andhra Pradesh could not have taken the	view
that  occupation  or  user of lands and	 buildings  for	 the
purpose of running horse races, and for training the  horses
etc.  constitutes occupation or user of the property  for  a
'charitable' purpose.
    The	 High Court has taken the said view,  an  impossible
view  in our opinion, in the context of the  exemption	from
levy  of  municipal taxes claimed by the  Race	Course	Club
(respondent herein) in respect of 127 acres, 14 goonthas and
95 sq. yards of land alongwith structures
197
standing thereon, which were sought to be assessed to gener-
al tax under Section 202 of the Hyderabad Municipal Corpora-
tion  Act (Act in short). The respondent  boldly  contended,
and strangely enough succeeded in convincing the High Court,
that  Section 202(1)(b) of the Act was attracted as  occupa-
tion  and user of the property for running horse  races	 and
training  of horses etc. constituted occupation and user  of
the  property for a 'charitable purpose' within the  meaning
of the said provision.
Now, Section 202(1)(b) of the Act is in these terms:
		    "202(1) The general tax shall be  levied
	      in  respect of all buildings and lands in	 the
	      city except--
	      (a) xxxx
	      (b)  buildings and lands or  portions  thereof
	      solely occupied and used for public worship or
	      for a charitable or educational purpose;
	      (c) xxxx
	      (d) xxxx"
    The	 High Court launched upon an exercise  to  ascertain
whether the income of the Race Club was used for a  charita-
ble purpose. And on perceiving that some of the purposes for
which the income was to be employed were charitable purposes
concluded  that	 the exemption under Section  202(1)(b)	 was
available.  The	 test to apply is to seek an answer  to	 the
question:  to what use is the property put or for what	pur-
pose  is  the property put. And to  ascertain  whether	such
occupation  or	user is for a 'charitable' purpose.  In	 the
present	 case  the occupation and user is to  conduct  horse
races  and  to	train horses for racing. Unless	 it  can  be
posited	 that  conducting  of horse races  is  a  charitable
purpose,  it  cannot be concluded that the  exemption  envi-
sioned	by Section 202(1)(b) is attracted. And even  if	 one
were  to  take	the most 'charitable' view  as	regards	 the
meaning and content of the expression 'charitable'  conduct-
ing  of	 horse	races or training of horses  for  the  races
cannot	be said to be a charitable activity. The  expression
charitable  in	the  context of Section	 202(1)(b)  means  a
benevolent  activity calculated to benefit the poor  or	 the
deprived.  Surely  horse  racing is not	 such  a  benevolent
activity,  however charitable a view one takes. It has	also
to be emphasized that it must be the very activity which  is
carried on on
198
the  property which must be charitable and not the  applica-
tion of the income of such activity.
    What the High Court has completely failed to realize  is
that  the  'occupation'	 of the land and  buildings  or	 the
'user'	of the land and buildings must be for a	 'charitable
purpose'  and  that it is altogether irrelevant	 as  to	 the
manner in which the income of the club is utilised.  Section
202(1)(b) makes no reference to the question as regards	 the
employment  of	the income of the club or  the	purpose	 for
which  the income is so employed. Exemption is granted	only
in  respect  of buildings which are 'solely'  used,  meaning
thereby	 exclusively used, for charitable purpose.  For	 in-
stance,	 if  the premises are occupied for the	purposes  of
benevolent activities such as the running of a free  dispen-
sary  or  :clinic or for running of a free  school  for	 the
children, such user of the building would constitute a	user
for a charitable purpose and entitle the owner of the build-
ing to claim exemption. It is impossible to subscribe to the
view that occupation or user for 'any' purpose would consti-
tute a user for a charitable purpose provided the income  is
used for a charitable purpose. Clutching at the tail of this
reasoning, one would be induced to the conclusion that	user
of a building for running a common gaming house (or for	 any
immoral or illegal purpose) would be user for a 'charitable'
purpose	 provided the income of the common gaming  house  is
utilised for a charitable purpose. The argument deserves  no
further	 scrutiny and must be rejected outright. No  further
exercise need be undertaken in order to find out whether  or
not  Section  202(1)(b)	 is attracted in the  facts  of	 the
present matter. The judgment of the High Court in so far  as
the  High  Court holds that Section 202(1)(b)  is  attracted
must  therefore	 be reversed and set aside. We	are  of	 the
opinion	 that the user of the premises for the	Race  Course
Club will not constitute occupation or user for a charitable
purpose within the meaning of Section 202(1)(b) and the Race
Course	Club  will not be entitled to claim  exemption	from
levy of general tax.
    Two other questions have been agitated by the  Appellant
Municipal Corporation. First, whether the general tax  could
have  been lawfully levied for the assessment year  1966-67.
The  High  Court  has rightly taken a view  adverse  to	 the
appellant on an appreciation of evidence. We do not see	 any
fallacy in the reasoning of the High Court. We therefore  do
not  propose  to disturb the finding recorded  by  the	High
Court in so far as this question is concerned. Secondly,  as
regards the valuation of the property. The learned Judge  of
the  Small  Causes  Court has valued the  property  at	Rs.4
lakhs. The valuation made by the Small Causes Court has been
confirmed by the High
199
Court.	We see no reason to interfere with the valuation  as
made  by  the Small Causes Court and confirmed by  the	High
Court.	Accordingly, in so far as these two points are	con-
cerned,	 the  decision rendered by the High  Court  must  be
confirmed.
    The	 appeals are therefore partly allowed to  the  afore
said extent. The order passed by the High Court in so far as
it is held that the property is exempt from levy of  general
tax  under  Section 202(1)(b) is' set aside.  The  appellant
would  be entitled to levy general tax from 1967-68  onwards
in  accordance with law. The appeals are partly	 allowed  to
this extent. There will be no order as to costs.
A.P.J.						     Appeals
allowed.
200




