

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Lakshmichand & Balchand vs State Of Andhra Pradesh on 5 November, 1986Equivalent citations: 1987 AIR   20, 1987 SCR  (1) 108
Author: R Pathak
Bench: Pathak, R.S.
           PETITIONER:
LAKSHMICHAND & BALCHAND

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF ANDHRA PRADESH

DATE OF JUDGMENT05/11/1986

BENCH:
PATHAK, R.S.
BENCH:
PATHAK, R.S.
OZA, G.L. (J)

CITATION:
 1987 AIR   20		  1987 SCR  (1) 108
 1987 SCC  (1)	19	  JT 1986   785
 1986 SCALE  (2)725


ACT:
    Civil Procedure Code, 1908--Order 21, Rule 18---Power of
the  Court  to	allow set off--When is a  claim	 rounded  on
doctrine of equitable set off.



HEADNOTE:
    The	 appellant-contractor  entered into  two  agreements
with  the  respondent State for carrying  out  certain	road
repairing  works.  Clause 68 of the agreement  provided	 for
preparation of the final bill of the contractor after taking
into  account amounts received by him earlier, while  clause
71  permitted the State to retain or deduct money due  under
the contract from an amount due to the contractor under	 any
other contract. While the work was in progress the  contrac-
tor  made  certain  claims in respect of  loss	suffered  on
account	 of delay, escalation of rates and other heads.	 The
arbitrator  held the contractor entitled to Rs.99 lacs.	 The
civil court refused to pass a decree in terms of the  award.
The High Court on appeal allowed the claim to the extent  of
Rs.16  lacs together with interest. The	 contractor  claimed
recovery  of decretal amount with interest in terms  of	 the
award  and  cost of execution  proceedings.  The  respondent
State  contested  the claim contending that a sum  of  Rs.22
lacs was recoverable from the appellant and claimed  adjust-
ment against the amount due under the decree. The  Executing
Court held the respondent State entitled to set off.
    In	the revision petition before the High Court  it	 was
contended  for the appellant that the respondent  State	 was
not  entitled to set off in execution proceedings, and	that
the  sum of which adjustment was sought consisted of (a)  an
amount claimed by respondent State as due to it upon  prepa-
ration of the final bill in respect of the contracts covered
by  the award, and (b) an amount claimed by  the  respondent
State  under  a	 separate contract on the  ground  that	 the
appellant had committed a breach of that contract. The	High
Court  having  regard to cl. 68 of the agreement  found	 the
respondent  State  entitled to set off so far as  the  first
claim  was concerned. It justified the second claim also  by
reference to cl. 71 of the contract but held that adjustment
claimed	 could not be made against the decretal	 amount	 but
must await determination upon the arbitration.
109
    In	this appeal by special leave it was  contended	that
Order  21,  Rule 18 of the Code of  Civil  Procedure,  under
which  a set off can be claimed, does not apply in terms  to
the present case.
Allowing the appeal in part, the Court,
    HELD:  1. The Court has the power to allow a set off  in
certain	 circumstances even in cases which do  not  strictly
fail  within the terms of Order 21, Rule 18 of the  Code  of
Civil Procedure. [112B]
    Bhoganadham	 Seshaiah v. Budhi Veerabhadrayya  (died)  &
Ors., AIR 1972 Andhra Pradesh 134, approved.
    2.	The  respondent State's claim to adjustment  of	 the
amount	due to it upon the preparation of the final bill  is
covered	 by cl. 68 of the contract. What was awarded to	 the
contractor under the decree was an amount relating to a part
only of the work entrusted to him. The contract was still in
the process of execution. Any amount claimed by him for such
work  was  subject to a final settlement of account  on	 the
preparation of the final bill. The fight to payment depended
on  the	 terms of the contract. Any payment made  while	 the
contract  was still being worked out was in the nature of  a
provisional  payment.  It was always subject  to  adjustment
against amounts found due on preparation of the final  bill.
Such  adjustment was implied in the very terms of  the	con-
tract. The High Court was, therefore, right in holding	that
the amount claimed by the State Government on this count was
entitled  to be set off against the decretal amount  claimed
by the contractor. [112C E]
    3.1	 The  claim to adjustment of the amount	 claimed  on
breach	of  another contract is rounded in the	doctrine  of
equitable  set	off but there is no evidence  on  record  to
bring  the case within the operation of the doctrine. It  is
not a case where cross demands rise out of the same transac-
tion,  or the demands are so connected in their	 nature	 and
circumstances  that they can he looked upon as part  of	 one
transaction. [112F G]
    3.2 The benefit of cl. 71 of the contract can be claimed
only if the amount sought to. he retained is an	 ascertained
sum,  an  amount which can be readily adjusted	against	 the
amount	payable	 under the other contract.  In	the  instant
case, the amount sought to be adjusted had yet to be  deter-
mined as a liability against the contractor. The decision of
the  High  Court cannot, therefore,  he	 sustained.  [112GH,
113A]



JUDGMENT:
    CIVIL  APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 4083  of
1986
110
    From  the  judgment	 and order dated  13.4.1984  of	 the
Andhra Pradesh High Court in C.R.P. No. 3072 of 1983.
Dr. Y.S. Chitale, G.N. Narayan and N. Nittar for the  Appel-
lant.
    T.S.  Krishnamurthy	 Iyer,	T.V.S.N. Chaff	and  Ms.  V.
Grover for the Respondent;
The Order of the Court was delivered by
    PATHAK, J. This appeal is directed against the  judgment
and order of the High Court of Andhra Pradesh disposing of a
revision  petition filed by the Appellant in execution	pro-
ceedings.
    The	 Appellant  is a contractor, who  entered  into	 two
agreements  with the Government of the State of Andhra	Pra-
desh  for providing B.T. Macadam wearing coat and seal	coat
along  two  stretches of the  Hyderabad-Vijayawada  National
Highway. While the work was in progress, the contractor made
certain claims in respect of the loss suffered on account of
delay, escalation of rates and other heads. The claims	were
referred to arbitration. On September 4, 1979 the Arbitrator
held the contractor entitled to a sum of Rs.99,00,000  under
five  heads  of claim. The contractor applied to  the  Civil
Court  for  making the award a rule of the Court  while	 the
State Government prayed for setting aside the entire  award.
The  Civil Court set aside the award and refused to  pass  a
decree in terms of the award. The contractor-appealed to the
High Court, and on April 19, 1982 the High Court allowed the
appeal	to the extent of one of the claims only,  the  claim
being for loss of profit in the sum of Rs. 16,00,000 togeth-
er with interest. The appeal was dismissed in respect of the
other heads of claim.
    For	 the realisation of the amount due under the  decree
the  contractor	 filed	Execution Petition No.	48  of	1982
before	the V Additional Judge, City Civil Court,  Hyderabad
claiming  recovery  of Rs. 16,00,000  towards  the  decretal
amount,	 Rs.7,80,000 towards interest in terms of the  award
up  to the date of the execution petition and  Rs.8,691	 to-
wards costs of the Execution Petition. The State  Government
filed  objections,  contending	inter alia  that  a  sum  of
Rs.22,91,332  was recoverable by it from the contractor	 and
claimed adjustment against the amount due to the  contractor
under  the  said decree. It urged that after  adjusting	 the
amount	due to the State Government the balance	 payable  to
the contractor would stand reduced to Rs.76,667. This sum
111
together with the other deposits of the contractor with	 the
Government  and	 refundable  to him,  viz.  Rs.3,92,236	 was
deposited  in the Executing Court. The	contractor  withdrew
the  amount without prejudice to his rights to	contest	 the
adjustment. The Executing Court held that the State  Govern-
ment was entitled to set off the amounts claimed by it,	 and
accordingly  adjourned	the Execution Petition	for  further
proceedings.
    The contractor filed a revision petition before the High
Court and contended that the State Government was not  enti-
tled  to claim adjustment in execution proceedings.  It	 was
pointed out that the sum of Rs.22,91,332 of which adjustment
was  sought by the State Government against the	 amount	 for
which  the contractor had taken out execution, consisted  of
(a)  an amount of Rs.10,21,800 claimed by the State  Govern-
ment as due to it upon the preparation of the final bill  in
respect	 of  the contracts covered by the award and  (b)  an
amount	of  Rs. 12,69,532 claimed by  the  State  Government
under a separate contract on the ground that the  contractor
had  committed	a breach of that  contract.  The  contractor
disputed  both claims. He contended that the final  bill  in
respect	 of  the earlier contract had been prepared  in	 his
absence	 and  that he challenged the  inclusion	 of  several
items in that bill. In regard to the latter amount he  urged
that he was not guilty of any breach of contract.
    The High Court has found that so far as the first  claim
to adjustment was concerned the State Government was  justi-
fied in making it because the arbitration was effected while
the  work was still in progress and the contract was in	 the
process of execution by the contractor, and having regard to
clause	68 of the agreement final payment had to be made  to
the  contractor after taking into account the  amount  which
had  been received by him earlier. The second claim  to	 ad-
justment  was  made by the State  Government  under  another
contract, and the High Court justified that claim by  refer-
ence  to  clause 71 of that contract,  which  permitted	 the
Government to retain or deduct money due under the  contract
from  an amount due to the contractor under any	 other	con-
tract. However, it held that the adjustments claimed by	 the
State  Government  could not be made  against  the  decretal
amount but must await determination upon due arbitration.
    Learned  counsel  for the Appellant contends  before  us
that  the State Government is not entitled to a set  off  at
all  because, he says, a set off can be claimed	 only  under
Order  21  Rule 18 of the Code of Civil Procedure  and	that
provision does not apply in terms to the present
112
case. Learned counsel for the respondent urges, on the other
hand,  that  the power of the Court extends to	granting  an
equitable  set off in appropriate cases, and the High  Court
was therefore justified in making the order which it did.
    We have no doubt that in certain cases the Court has the
power to allow a set off even in cases which do not strictly
fall  within  the terms of Order 21 Rule 18 of the  Code.  A
Full  Bench of the Andhra Pradesh High Court  has  discussed
the  matter in Bhoganadham Seshaiah v. Budhi  Veerabhadrayya
(died)	and  Others, AIR [1972] Andhra Pradesh 134  and	 has
examined at some length the circumstances in which such	 set
off may be granted. The facts before us, however, call for a
somewhat different consideration. So far as the first  claim
to adjustment is concerned, the matter is covered by  clause
68 of the contract. What was awarded to the contractor under
the decree was an amount relating to a part only of the work
entrusted  to him. The contract was still in the process  of
execution.  Any	 amount	 claimed by him for  such  work	 was
subject to a final settlement of account on the	 preparation
of  the	 final bill. The right to payment  depended  on	 the
terms  of the contract. Any payment made while the  contract
was still being worked out was in the nature of a provision-
al  payment.  It was always subject  to	 adjustment  against
amounts	 found due against the contractor on preparation  of
the  final  bill. Such adjustment was implied  in  the	very
terms  of the contract. Therefore, in regard to the  adjust-
ment claimed by the State Government on the first count	 the
High  Court  is right, in our opinion, in holding  that	 the
amount	claimed	 by the State Government, as  determined  on
arbitration, was entitled to a set off against the  decretal
amount	claimed by the contractor, and that payment  of	 the
decretal amount was to be subject to such adjustment.
    In regard to the claim to adjustment on the second count
the position is more controversial. The claim is rounded  in
the  doctrine of equitable set off, but we do not find	evi-
dence  before us to bring the case within the  operation  of
the doctrine. It is not a case where cross demands rise	 out
of  the same transaction or the demands are so connected  in
their nature and circumstances that they can be looked	upon
as  part of one transaction. Nor can assistance	 be  derived
from clause 71. The benefit of that provision can be claimed
only  if the amount sought to be retained is an	 ascertained
sum,  an  amount which can be readily adjusted	against	 the
amount	payable under the other contract. Here,	 the  amount
sought to be adjusted has yet to be determined as a liabili-
ty  against  the  contractor. It has been  disputed  by	 the
appellant. Accordingly, clause 71 cannot be invoked. In	 the
result, the decision
113
of  me	High  Court  in respect of  the	 adjustment  of	 Rs.
12,69,532 cannot be sustained.
    In the circumstances, the appeal is allowed in part, the
judgment  and order of the High Court is modified in so	 far
that while the adjustment claimed by the State Government on
the basis of the final bill relating to the contract covered
by the award is maintained, the direction in respect of	 the
adjustment of the claim made under the other contract is set
aside. The parties will bear their own costs.
P.S.S.						Appeal	 al-
lowed.
114




