

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
A.S. Sulochana vs C. Dharmalingam on 28 November, 1986Equivalent citations: 1987 AIR  242, 1987 SCR  (1) 379
Author: M Thakkar
Bench: Thakkar, M.P. (J)
           PETITIONER:
A.S. SULOCHANA

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
C. DHARMALINGAM

DATE OF JUDGMENT28/11/1986

BENCH:
THAKKAR, M.P. (J)
BENCH:
THAKKAR, M.P. (J)
RAY, B.C. (J)

CITATION:
 1987 AIR  242		  1987 SCR  (1) 379
 1987 SCC  (1) 180	  JT 1986  1068
 1986 SCALE  (2)996


ACT:
    Tamilnadu  Buildings (Lease and Rent Control) Act  1960,
s.10(2)(ii)(a)-Eviction	 on the ground of  unlawful  sublet-
ting--Such  sub-letting must be by the tenant sought  to  be
evicted and not by his predecessor.



HEADNOTE:
    The	 appellant-landlord instituted an eviction  suit  in
1970 against the respondent-tenant on the ground of unlawful
subletting.  The respondent had inherited the  tenancy	upon
the death of his father in 1968. The subletting was created,
in  1952 during the life time of appellants father.  Neither
the appellant, nor the respondent had any personal knowledge
about  the  terms  and conditions of  the  lease  originally
granted	 by  the father of the appellant in  favour  of	 the
father of the respondent.
    The	 High  Court,  while dismissing the  appeal  of	 the
appellant-landlord, held that a tenant sought to be  evicted
on the ground of unlawful subletting under s.10(2)(ii)(a) of
the Tamil Nadu Buildings (Lease and Rent control) Act,	1960
must himself have been guilty of the contravention and	that
the alleged contravention by his father when he was a tenant
can be of no avail for evicting the tenant.
Dismissing the Appeal of the appellant-landlord, this Court,
    HELD:  1(i)	 Section  10(2) of the Act  opens  with	 the
words,	"a landlord who seeks to evict his tenant" and	pro-
vides  that if the tenant has created a	 subtenancy  without
the written consent of the landlord, he will he liable to be
evicted.  When the statute says the tenant who is sought  to
he  evicted must he guilty of the contravention,  the  Court
cannot	say,  "guilt of his predecessor	 in  interest"	will
suffice. [382C-D]
    (ii)  The  flouting of the law, the sin under  the	Rent
Act, must he the sin of the tenant sought to be evicted	 and
not that of his father or predecessor in interest. It  being
a  penal provision in the sense that it visits the  violator
with  the punishment of eviction, it must he  strictly	con-
strued, for it causes less misery to be sheltered in a jail,
than to be shelterless without. [382E]
In the instant case, there is nothing on record to show that
the subletting
380
which  was made in 1952,18 years before the  institution  of
the eviction suit in 1970, was in violation of the  relevant
provisions  of law. There is no evidence, direct or  circum-
stantial,  on  the basis of which it can be  said  that	 the
lease  did  not confer on the father of the  respondent	 the
right  to create a sub-tenancy, or that it was done  without
the written consent of the then landlord, the father of	 the
appellant.  Under these circumstances, the appellant  cannot
successfully  evict the respondent on the ground  of  having
created	 an  unlawful  sub-tenancy  within  the	 meaning  of
S.10(2)(ii)(a) of the Act. [381G, 382A-B]



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 1124 of 1973.
    From  the  Judgment and Order dated	 29.11.1972  of	 the
Madras High Court in C.R.P. No. 1066 of 1972.
K. Ramkumar for the Appellant.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
    THAKKAR,  J.  The view taken by the High  Court  that  a
tenant	sought to be evicted on the ground of unlawful	sub-
letting under Section 10(2)(ii)(a)1 of the Tamil Nadu Build-
ings  (Lease and Rent Control) Act, 1960 must  himself	have
been  guilty of the contravention and that the alleged	con-
travention  by his father when he was a tenant can be of  no
avail for evicting him is assailed in this appeal by special
leave.	The High Court has so pronounced in the backdrop  of
the  admitted fact that respondent had himself	not  created
any sub-tenancy after he became the tenant in 1968 upon	 the
death  of his father. The plea raised by the appellant	that
the  tenancy  created in 1952 by the  father  of  respondent
rendered him liable to be evicted in the suit instituted  by
the  appellant in 1970 was repelled. The unsuccessful  land-
lord has now invoked this Court's jurisdiction under Article
136 of the Constitution of India.
Facts not in dispute are:--
1. The father of the appellant had granted a lease in favour
of the
1.  "10(2) "  A landlord who seeks to evict his tenant shall
apply  to the Controller for a direction in that behalf.  If
the Controller, after giving the tenant a reasonable  oppor-
tunity	of showing cause against the application, is  satis-
fied-
	      (i) xxx  xxxx
	      (ii) that the tenant has after the 23rd  Octo-
ber, 1945 without the written consent of the landlord--
   (a)	transferred his right under the lease or sub-let the
entire	building or any portion thereof, if the	 lease	does
not confer on him any right to do so, or
X X X X XXXXX"
381
	      father of respondent prior to 1952 (the  exact
	      date or year is not on record).
			2.  The father of the  appellant  as
	      also the father of respondent both have died.
			3.  Respondent	was  accepted  as  a
	      tenant upon the death of his father in 1968.
			4. The suit for eviction giving rise
	      to  the  present	appeal	was  instituted	 for
	      eviction on the ground of unlawful  subletting
	      in 1970 by the appellant who had inherited the
	      property from her father.
			5. Admittedly, neither the appellant
	      nor the respondent have any personal knowledge
	      about  the terms and conditions of  the  lease
	      originally granted by the father of the appel-
	      lant in favour of the father of respondent no.
	      1.
			6. So also neither the appellant nor
	      the respondent have any personal knowledge  in
	      what circumstance the father of the respondent
	      had   created  a	sub-tenancy  in	 favour	  of
	      Kuppuswami  Sah  way back	 in  1952,  eighteen
	      years before the institution of the suit.
			7.  Neither  the appellant  nor	 re-
	      spondent	has  any personal  knowledge  as  to
	      whether  or  not the sub-tenancy	was  created
	      with  the	 written  consent  of  the  landlord
	      eighteen years back in 1952.
And  on these facts the prayer for eviction must  be  denied
regardless  of the question of interpretation which will  be
presently  tackled.  The mere fact that for as	many  as  18
years no objection was raised, and no action for  possession
was  instituted against the father of the appellant  in	 his
lifetime  notwithstanding  the fact that  a  sub-tenant	 was
openly in occupation of a part of the rented premises, would
give  rise  to	an inference that it was  never	 treated  as
unlawful  sub-letting by the appellant or her father.  There
is  nothing on record to show that the subletting  in  ques-
tion,  which was made in 1952, 18 years before the  institu-
tion  of the suit in 1970, was in violation of the  relevant
provisions  of law. The appellant cannot succeed unless	 the
appellant  establishes	that Section 10(2)(ii)(a)  has	been
violated  and  the tenant has incurred the liability  to  be
evicted on the ground of unlawful sub-letting  notwithstand-
ing  the fact that the lease did not confer on him any	such
right, and that such unlawful sub-tenancy was created  with-
out the
382
written consent of the then landlord. There is no  evidence,
direct	or circumstantial, on the basis of which it  can  be
said  that  the lease did not confer on the  father  of	 the
respondent the right to create a sub-tenancy. Or that it was
done without the written consent of the then landlord,	that
is  to say, the father of the appellant. Under	the  circum-
stances,  in  any view of the matter  the  appellant  cannot
successfully  evict the respondent on the ground  of  having
created	 an unlawful sub-tenancy within the meaning of	Sec-
tion 10(2)(ii)(a) of the Act.
    Examining  the  profile of the view taken  by  the	High
Court  that the offending sub-letting must be by the  tenant
sought to be evicted himself, and not by his predecessor, it
appears	 to  be blemishless. Section 10(2)  opens  with	 the
words  "A landlord who seeks to evict his tenant"  and	pro-
vides  that if the tenant has created a sub-tenancy  without
the written consent of the landlord, he will be liable to be
evicted. Pray who is the 'tenant' whom the landlord wants to
evict? That tenant is the respondent. Did he violate Section
10(2)(ii)(a) and sub,let the rented premises? The answer  is
'no'.  It is of little use to give the answer, not  he,	 but
his predecessor, his late father, had sub-let the  premises.
When the statute says the tenant who is sought to be evicted
must  be guilty of the contravention, the Court cannot	say,
'guilt	of  his predecessor in interest' will  suffice.	 The
flouting of the law, the sin under the Rent Act must be	 the
sin of the tenant sought to be evicted, and not that of	 his
father or predecessor in interest. Respondent inherited	 the
tenancy, not the sin, if any, of his father. The law in	 its
wisdom	seeks to punish the guilty who commits the sin,	 and
not  his  son who is innocent of the rent  law	offence.  It
being  a  penal provision in the sense that  it	 visits	 the
violator with the punishment of eviction, it must be strict-
ly construed, for it causes less misery to be sheltered in a
jail, than to be shelterless without. Be that as it may	 the
conclusion recorded by the High Court is fault-free.
    We, therefore, see no reason to interfere with the order
of  the	 High Court in exercise of  our	 jurisdiction  under
Article 136 of the Constitution of India. The appeal accord-
ingly  fails and is dismissed. There will be no order as  to
costs.
M.L.A.						      Appeal
dismissed,
383




