

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Delhi Police ... vs Union Of India & Ors on 20 November, 1986Equivalent citations: 1987 AIR  379, 1987 SCR  (1) 347
Author: V Khalid
Bench: Khalid, V. (J)
           PETITIONER:
DELHI POLICE NON-GAZETTEDKARMCHARI SANGH & ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
UNION OF INDIA & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT20/11/1986

BENCH:
KHALID, V. (J)
BENCH:
KHALID, V. (J)
OZA, G.L. (J)

CITATION:
 1987 AIR  379		  1987 SCR  (1) 347
 1987 SCC  (1) 115	  JT 1986   920
 1986 SCALE  (2)872


ACT:
    Constitution  of  India,  1950,  Article  19(1)(c)	 and
33--Right  to  form  an association by the  members  of	 the
Police	force--Non-gazetted  Karmachari	 Sangh	was  granted
recognition  on 12.12.1986 after the coming into  effect  of
the  Police  Forces (Restriction of Rights) Act	 No.  33  of
1966--The  Police Forces (Restriction of Rights) Rules	1966
were  made on the same date which was amended  by  Amendment
Rules,	1970-- The Association was derecognised in terms  of
Rule   11   of	 the  Amended  Rules   by   circular   dated
1.4.1971--Whether  the	Act, the Rules as  amended  and	 the
circular dated 1.4.1971 are ultra vires the Constitution and
opposed to Article 19(1)(c).



HEADNOTE:
    The	 non-gazetted  members	of the	Delhi  police  Force
wanted	to  form an association of their own  and  for	that
purpose constituted the Karmachari Union in 1966 and applied
for  its  registration under the Trade Union Act,  1926	 and
this  was  refused.  After  the	 coming	 into  effect	from
2.12.1966  of the Police Force (Restriction of Rights)	Act,
33  of 1966 another, application for recognition  was  again
made on 9.12.1966 which was granted on 12.12.1966. The	non-
gazetted members of the Delhi Police Force were permitted to
become	members of the Sangh. The Police Force	(Restriction
of  Rights)  Rules, 1966 made by the Central  Government  on
12.12.1966 were amended by the Amendment Rules of 1970. Rule
11 thereof provides for revocation of the recognition grant-
ed to an association, if the said associations articles	 are
not  in	 conformity  with the Rules or are  not	 brought  in
conformity with the provisions of the amended Rules within a
period of 30 days. Since the Articles of Association of	 the
appellant  Sangh  contained a number of	 provisions  not  in
conformity  with  the rules and since the  Sangh  failed  to
bring  the same in conformity, by a circular dated  1.4.1971
the recognition granted was revoked. The appellants,  there-
fore,  filed  a writ petition before the  Delhi	 High  Court
challenging  the constitutional validity of the	 Act,  Rules
and  the  impugned circular. The writ petition	having	been
rejected the appellants have come by way of special leave.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court,
348
    HELD:  1.1 The Police Force (Restriction of Rights)	 Act
(33 of) 1966, the Police Force (Restriction of Rights) Rules
1966  (as amended by the 1970 Rules) and the circular  dated
1.4.1971 are all constitutionally valid. They do not  offend
the provisions of Articles 14 and 19(1)(c) of the  Constitu-
tion. [350 C, 355 E-F]
    1.2	 The right under Article 19(1)(c) is  not  absolute.
Article	 19(4) specifically empowers the State to  make	 any
law  to fetter, abridge or abrogate any of the fights  under
Article	 19(1)(c) in the interest of public order and  other
considerations. While the right to freedom of association is
fundamental, recognition of such association is not a funda-
mental	fights	and the Parliament can by law  regulate	 the
working	 of  such associations by  imposing  conditions	 and
restrictions on such functions. [355 E, 356 F]
    1.3	  The  fundamental  fights  guaranteed	by   Article
19(1)(c) can be claimed by Government servants. A government
servant	 may not lose his right by joining government  serv-
ice.  Article  33 which confers power on the  Parliament  to
abridge or abrogate such rights in their application to	 the
Armed Forces and other similar forces shows that such fights
are  available to all citizens, including  government  serv-
ants.  What  has  happened in this case is  only  to  impose
reasonable  restrictions in the interest of  discipline	 and
public order. [356 G-H]
    1.4	 Rule 11 read with Rule 3(c) of the  Amended  Police
Force  (Restriction of Rights) Rules, 1966 has to be  judged
keeping	 in mind the character of the employees to  whom  it
applies.  It is true that the rules impose a restriction  on
the  right to form association. It virtually compels a	gov-
ernment	 servant to withdraw his membership of the  associa-
tion as soon as recognition accorded to the said association
is  withdrawn  or if, after the association  is	 formed,  no
recognition  is accorded to it within six months.  In  other
words,	the right to form an association is  conditioned  by
the existence of the recognition of the said association  by
the  government. If the association obtains recognition	 and
continues  to enjoy it, government servants can become	mem-
bers  of the said association, if the said association	does
not  secure recognition from the government  or	 recognition
granted	 to it is withdrawn, government servants must  cease
to  be	members of the said association. That is  the  plain
effect	of the impugned role. These rules are  protected  by
Articles  33 and 19(4) of the Constitution. Besides,  it  is
settled law that the right guaranteed by Article 19(1)(c) to
form  associations  does not involve a guaranteed  right  to
recognition also. [357 A-C]
    1.5	 Section  3  of the  Police  Force  (Restriction  of
Rights) Act permits the rule making authority to define	 any
group of Police Force that can form an Association. It	also
gives  power to prescribe the nature of activity  that	each
such  association of members can indulge in. It,  therefore,
follows that if rules can be
349
framed	defining  this	aspect, a rule can  also  be  framed
enabling  the  authorities to revoke or	 cancel	 recognition
once accorded, if the activities offended the rules. Besides
the  classification based on ranking has its  own  rationale
behind it. The Court is dealing with a Force in which disci-
pline  is  the	most  important	 prerequisite.	Non-gazetted
officers  consist of men of all ranks; the lowest cadre	 and
officers  who are superior to them. If all the	non-gazetted
officers  are grouped together irrespective of rank,  it  is
bound  to affect discipline. It was perhaps,  realising	 the
need  to  preserve discipline that the changes in  the	rule
were effected. [357E, G ]
    Damyanti Naranga v. The Union of India & Ors., [1971]  3
SCR  840;  Ous Kutilingal Achudan Nair & Ors., v.  Union  of
India  &  Ors.,	 [1976] 2 SCR 769; and	Raghubar  Dayal	 Jai
Prakash v. The Union of India & Ors., [1962] 3 SCR 547	fol-
lowed.



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL  APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 222  (N)  of
1973.
    From the Judgment and Order dated 13.3.1972 of the Delhi
High Court in Civil Writ No. 731 of 1971.
M.K. Dua, Aman Vachher and S.K. Mehta for the Appellants.
    B.	Datta, Additional Solicitor General, G.D. Gupta	 and
Mr. C.V. Subba Rao for the Respondents.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
    KHALID,  J.	 1. This appeal by certificate	is  directed
against	 the Judgment of a Division Bench of the Delhi	High
Court,	in  C.W.  No. 731 of 1971. The prayer  in  the	Writ
Petition  is for the issuance of an appropriate writ,  order
or direction declaring (a) the Police Forces (Restriction of
Rights)	 Act  No. 33 of 1966 (for short the  Act)  as  ultra
vires the Constitution,
(b) the Police Forces (Restriction of Rights) Rules 1966 and
Police Forces (Restriction of Rights) Amendment Rules,	1970
(for short  the Rules) ultra vires of Act 33 of 1966 and the
Constitution of India,
     (c) that the Circular dated 1st April, 1971 as invalid,
illegal,  ultra vires, null and void and (d) for a  declara-
tion  that  the Delhi Police Non Gazetted  Karmchari  Sangh,
petitioner  No.	 1 in the Writ Petition, is  a	legally	 and
validly constituted service organisation.
350
    2.	The first appellant is the  Non-Gazetted  Karmachari
Sangh (for short the 'Sangh') and the appellant Nos. 2 to 7,
its  members. The High Court dismissed the petition  holding
that the challenge was not sustainable and that neither	 the
Act  nor the Rules violated any provisions of the  Constitu-
tion.
    The	 High  Court dealt at length  with  the	 preliminary
objections  that a challenge based on the violation  of	 any
fundamental  right was not permissible in view of the  emer-
gency declared by the President of India, in December, 1977.
This need not detain us now in this Judgment.
    3.	The appellants' case is that the Act referred  above
violates  Article 19(1)(c) of the Constitution of India	 and
that  the  restrictions	 imposed by  it.,  being  arbitrary,
violates  Article 14 of the Constitution.  The	Non-Gazetted
members of the Delhi Police Force wanted to form an  organi-
sation	of  their own and for that purpose  constituted	 the
Karmachari  Union in 1966 and applied for  its	registration
under the Trade Union Act, 1926. Initially the	registration
asked for was declined. Then Act 33 of 1966 was enacted.  It
came  into force on 2nd December, 1966. An  application	 for
recognition  was again made on 9th December, 1966.  Recogni-
tion was granted by the Central Government on 12th December,
1966.  The  Non-Gazetted members of the Delhi  Police  Force
were  permitted	 to  become members of the  Sangh.  On	12th
December, 1966, the Central Government made rules under	 the
Act  which were amended in December, 1970. The	Circular  in
question was issued under these rules. The Circular attempts
to derecognise the Sangh. This occassioned the filing of the
writ petition.
    4. Before considering the rival contentions urged before
us,  it would be useful to refer to the salient features  of
the Act to appreciate its ambit and the restrictions imposed
by  its	 provisions. The Act was enacted  to  delineate	 the
restrictions imposed of the rights conferred by part III  of
the Constitution, in their application to the members of the
forces charged with the maintenance of public order so as to
ensure the proper discharge of their duties' and the mainte-
nance of discipline among them. The Parliament obviously has
this  power under Article 33 of the Constitution  of  India.
The provisions of the Act seek to place certain restrictions
on  members of the police force in exercise of their  funda-
mental rights guaranteed by Article 19(1)(c) to form Associ-
ation or Unions. Section 3 of the Act reads as follows:
	      "3(1) No member of a police force shall  with-
	      out  the express sanction of the Central	Gov-
	      ernment or of the prescribed authority-- (a)be
	      a member of, or be associated in any way with,
	      any  trade  union,  labour  union,   political
	      association or with any class of trade unions,
	      labour unions or political
	      351
	      associations;  or	 (b) be a member of,  or  be
	      associated in any way with, any other society,
	      institution, association or organisation	that
	      is  not  recognised as part of  the  force  of
	      which  he	 is a member or is not of  a  purely
	      social,  recretional or religious	 nature;  or
	      (c)  communicate with the press or publish  or
	      cause  to	 be published any  book,  letter  or
	      other document except where such communication
	      or  publication is in the bona fide  discharge
	      of  his  duties or is of	a  purely  literary,
	      artistic	or scientific character or is  of  a
	      prescribed nature.
	      Explanation:  If	any question  arises  as  to
	      whether any society, institution,	 association
	      or organisation is of a purely social,  recre-
	      tional or religious nature under clause (b) of
	      this  subsection, the decision of the  Central
	      Government thereon shall be final.
	      (2) No member of a police force shall partici-
	      pate  in or address, any meeting or take	part
	      in any demonstration organised by any body  of
	      persons for any political purposes or for such
	      other purposes as may be prescribed."
 Section 4 of the Act provides for penalties if Section 3
is  contravened by any person. Section 5 gives power to	 the
Central Government by notification in the official  gazette,
to amend the schedule by including therein any other  enact-
ment  relating	to a force charged with the  maintenance  of
public order or omit therefrom any enactment already  speci-
fied  therein. Section 6 gives the rule making power to	 the
Central Government.
    5. The only contention that now survives is whether	 the
impugned  statute,  rules and orders are  violative  of	 the
fights	of the appellants guaranteed under Article  19(1)(c)
of the Constitution of India. This appeal could be  disposed
of by a short Order. Appellants No. 2 to 7 are no longer  in
service. They have been dismissed. As such they do not	have
the necessary locus standi to sustain this petition. But the
appellants' counsel submitted that the first petitioner--the
Sangh, was still interested in pursuing this appeal and that
persuaded us to hear the appeal on merits.
    6.	It is true that recognition was given to  the  Sangh
originally.  Subsequently by order dated 1 st  April,  1971,
the Sangh was derecognized. This was pursuant to the amended
rules. Rule 3 provided that "no member of the police  forces
shall  participate in, or address, any meeting or take	part
in any demonstration organised by any body of persons (a)for
the  purpose of protesting against any of the provisions  of
the Act or these rules or any other
352
rules made under the Act; or (b)for the purpose of  protest-
ing  against  any disciplinary action taken proposed  to  be
taken  against him or against any other member of  a  police
force;	or  (c)for  any purpose connected  with	 any  matter
pertaining to his remuneration or other conditions of  serv-
ice  or	 his condition of work or living condition,  or	 the
remuneration,  other  conditions,  of any  other  member  or
members of a police force.
    "Provided  that  nothing contained	in  clause(c)  shall
preclude a member of a police force from participating in  a
meeting	 convened by an association of which he is a  member
and  which has been accorded sanction under sub-section	 (1)
of  section3 of the Act, where such meeting is in  pursuance
of  or for the furtherance of, the objects of such  associa-
tion."
    The	 above	rules were amended by a	 notification  dated
19th  December,	 1970 the material change  for	our  purpose
being  an amendment in the proviso to clause (c) of rule  3.
The original proviso to clause(c) was substituted by another
proviso which reads as follows:
	      "Provided that nothing contained in clause (c)
	      shall preclude a member of a police force from
	      participating  in	 a  meeting--(i)  which	  is
	      convened by an association of  police-officers
	      of  the the same rank of which he is a  member
	      and  which has been granted recognition  under
	      clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 3  of
	      the Act;
	      (ii) which has been specifically provided	 for
	      in  the  articles of  association	 or/and	 has
	      been,  by general or special order,  permitted
	      by  the  Inspector General  of  Police  having
	      regard'  to  the object of  such	meeting	 and
	      other relevant factors; and
	      (iv)  which has been convened to consider	 the
	      agenda  circulated to all concerned  according
	      to the relevant provisions of the articles  of
	      association,  after giving intimation  in	 ad-
	      vance to the ' Inspector General of Police  or
	      an  officer nominated by him." (Emphasis	sup-
	      plied).
    Rule 5 was added to the Rules by virtue of which minutes
had to be recorded of the meetings of a recognised  associa-
tion.  The Inspector General of Police could send  observers
by virtue of rule 6 to such meetings. Outsiders were prohib-
ited from attending the meetings of the association  without
permission  of	the Inspector General of Police by  Rule  7.
Rules 8, 9 & 11 may also be usefully read:
353
	      "8.  Recognition:	 Members  of  police   force
	      belonging to the same rank desiring to form an
	      association  may make an application  for	 the
	      grant of recognition under clause (b) of	sub-
	      section (1) of section 3 and such	 application
	      shall be in writing under the hand of a repre-
	      sentation of such association addressed to the
	      Inspector	 General of Police who shall be	 the
	      authority	 to  grant, refuse  or	revoke	such
	      recognition;
			Provided  that	before	refusing  or
	      revoking recognition, the Association shall be
	      given  a	reasonable  opportunity	 of   making
	      representation against the proposed action."
	      "9.  Suspension of recognition: The  Inspector
	      General of Police may in the interests of	 the
	      general  public  or  for	the  maintenance  of
	      discipline  in the police-force and  with	 the
	      prior approval of the Central Government,	 the
	      State  Government	 or as the ease may  be	 the
	      Administrator  of the Union Territory  suspend
	      the  recognition	granted under rule 8  for  a
	      period not exceeding three months which may be
	      extended for a further period of three  months
	      by the Central Government, State Government or
	      as  the case may be the Administrator  of	 the
	      Union  Territory	so however  that  the  total
	      period  for  which  such	recognition  may  be
	      suspended shall, not, in any case, exceed	 six
	      months."
	      "11.  Special provision regarding	 recognition
	      already granted:
			Recognition  granted  prior  to	 the
	      commencement of the Police Forces (Restriction
	      of  Rights)  Amendment  Rules,  1970,  to	 any
	      association  the	articles of  association  of
	      which  are not in conformity with these  rules
	      shall, unless the said artides of	 association
	      are brought in conformity with the  provisions
	      of these rules within a period of thirty days,
	      stand revoked on the expiry of the said  peri-
	      od."
    7. It is the change effected by the new Proviso to	Rule
3(c) which has come in for attack at the hands of the appel-
lants.	Previously  all non-gazetted officers of  the  Delhi
Police	Department could be members of the Sangh.  Now,	 the
amended	 proviso to rule 3(c) mandates that only members  of
the  Police  Force  having the same  rank  could  constitute
themselves into one Association. The effect of this  amended
rule  is that the Sangh will have to be composed of  various
splinter associations consisting of members holding  differ-
ent  ranks.  This according to the appellants  violates	 not
only Article 19(1)(c) which protects freedom of association,
but also the provisions of the Act.
354
    The	 immediate provocation for filing the writ  petition
was  the  Circular by which the recognition granted  to	 the
Sangh was revoked. The operative part of the Circular  reads
as follows:
	      "Rule  11	 of the	 Police	 Force	(Restriction
	      of  Rights)  Amendment Rules,  1970  published
	      vide extraordinary Gazette of India  notifica-
	      tion  No.	 GSR-2049 dated 19-12-70  lays	down
	      that  recognition	 granted prior to  the	com-
	      mencement	 of these rules, to any	 association
	      the  articles of which are not  in  conformity
	      with these rules shall unless the articles are
	      brought  in conformity with the provisions  of
	      these rules within a period of 30 days,  stand
	      revoked on the expiry of the said period.
			 2. Whereas the Constitution of	 the
	      Delhi Police NonGazetted Karmchari Sangh which
	      was  granted  recognition vide  Government  of
	      India,   Ministry	 of  Home   Affairs   letter
	      No.8/70/66-P.I.,	dated  12-12-66	 and   which
	      contains	a number of provisions not  in	con-
	      formity with the above rules, the	 recognition
	      already granted to the Delhi Police Non-Gazet-
	      ted Karmachari Sangh, stands revoked.
	      3.  This may be brought to the notice  of	 a11
	      ranks.
			 4.  A copy of this circular may  be
	      published in the Delhi Police Gazette."
    The appellants' counsel Submits that recognition of	 the
association carries with it the right to continue the  asso-
ciation	 as  such. It is a right flowing from  the  fact  of
recognition.  To derecognise the association in	 effect	 of-
fends  against the freedom of association. It is urged	that
once  the Government had granted recognition to	 the   Sangh
and approved its constitution neither the Parliament nor any
delegated  authority can take away that recognition or	dic-
tate to the association who could be its members. The  right
available to the members of the association at the commence-
ment should continue as such without any hindrance.
    8. Before considering the questions of law raised by the
appellants' counsel with reference to the decided cases,  it
would be useful to bear in mind the fact that this  associa-
tion  consists of members of Police Force who by  virtue  of
this  fact  alone stands on a different footing	 from  other
associations.  The Constitution of India has taken  care  to
lay  down limitations on such, associations from  exercising
rights under Article 19(1)(c). Article 33 read with
355
Article 19(4) of the Constitution offers an effective  reply
to the contention raised by the appellants. Article 33 reads
as follows:
	      "Parliament  may,	 by law, determine  to	what
	      extent  any  of the rights conferred  by	this
	      Part  shall, in their application to the	mem-
	      bers of the Armed Forces or the Forces charged
	      with  the	 maintenance  of  public  order,  be
	      restricted  or abroagated so as to ensure	 the
	      proper  discharge	 of  their  duties  and	 the
	      maintenance of discipline among them."
Article 19(4) reads as follows:
	      "Nothing in sub clause (c) of the said  clause
	      shall affect the operation of any existing law
	      in so far as it imposes, or prevent the  State
	      from making any law imposing, in the interests
	      of  the sovereignty and integrity of India  or
	      public order or morality, reasonable  restric-
	      tions  on the exercise of the right  conferred
	      by the said sub-clause."
    That the Sangh and its members come within the ambit  of
Article 33 cannot be disputed. The provisions of the Act and
rules  taking away or abridging the freedom  of	 association
have  been made strictly in conformity with Article 33.	 The
right under Article 19(1)(c) is not absolute. Article  19(4)
specifically  empowers the State to make any law to  fetter,
abridge or abrogate any of the rights under Article 19(1)(c)
in  the interest of public order and  other  considerations.
Thus the attack against the Act and rules can be successful-
ly  met with reference to these two Articles as	 members  of
the Police Force, like the appellants herein, are at a	less
advantageous  position,	 curtailment of whose  fights  under
Article	 19(1)(c)  comes squarely within Article 33  in	 the
interest of discipline and public order. This conclusion  of
ours  is sufficient to dispose of this appeal.	However,  we
will  deal with the submissions made before us for the	com-
pleteness of the Judgment.
    9. The scope of Article 19(1)(c) came up for  considera-
tion  before this Court in Damyanti Naranga v. The Union  of
India & Ors., [1971] 3 SCR 840. The question related to	 the
Hindi  Sahitya	Sammelan,  a Society  registered  under	 the
Societies Registration Act, 1860. The Parliament enacted the
Hindi  Sahitya Sammelan Act under which outsiders were	per-
mitted	to become members of the Sammelan without the  voli-
tion  of the original members. This was challenged and	this
Court  held  that any law altering the	composition  of	 the
Association  compulsorily will be a breach of the  right  to
form the association because it violated the composite right
of  forming an association and the right to continue  it  as
the original members desired it.
356
    10.	 Here we have an entirely different situation  since
we  are	 dealing  with a group distinct in  its	 nature	 and
composition  from others. Here we are dealing with  a  force
that  is  invested  with powers to  maintain  public  order.
Article	 33 enables Parliament to restrict or  abrogate	 the
fundamental  rights  in their relation to the  Armed  Forces
including  Police  Force. In Ous Kutilingal Achudan  Nair  &
Ors., v. Union India & Ors., [1976] 2 SCR 769 this Court had
to  consider  two questions; whether the  employees  of	 the
defence establishment such as cooks, barbers and like  civil
employees  were	 "members  of the Armed Forces"	 and  if  so
whether	 they  could be validly deprived of their  right  to
form  unions  in violation of Article 19(1)(c).	 This  Court
held  that they fell within the category of members  of	 the
Armed  Forces and that the Central Government was  competent
by  notification  to make rules	 restricting  or  curtailing
their  right  to  form associations,  Article  19(1)(c)	 not
withstanding.
    11. In Raghubar Dayal Jai Prakash v. The Union of  India
and Ors., [1962] 3 SCR 547. this Court had to deal with this
question  in  relation to the functions of  an	incorporated
body  the  objects  of which were,  interalia,	to  regulate
forward	 transactions  in the sale and purchase	 of  various
commodities, Freedom of association is a fundamental  right.
It was contended that if a law regulated the recognition  of
an  association	 under certain conditions subject  to  which
alone  recognition  could  be accorded	or  continued,	such
conditions were bad. This Court had to consider whether	 the
freedom	 of  association implied or  involved  a  guaranteed
right  to recognition also. The contention was that  if	 the
object of an association was lawful, no restriction could be
placed	upon it except in the interest of public  order	 and
that  freedom  to form an association carried  with  it	 the
right to determine its internal arrangements also. Repelling
this contention this Court held that restrictions cannot  be
imposed by statute for the purpose of regulating control  of
such associations. While the right to freedom of association
is  fundamental,  recognition of such association is  not  a
fundamental right and the Parliament can by law regulate the
working	 of  such associations by  imposing  conditions	 and
restrictions on such functions.
    12.	 It cannot be disputed that the	 fundamental  rights
guaranteed by Article 19(1)(c) can be claimed by  Government
servants.  A  Government servant may not lose its  right  by
joining	 Government service. Article 33 which confers  power
on  the	 Parliament to abridge or abrogate  such  rights  in
their  application  to the Armed Forces	 and  other  similar
forces shows that such rights are available to all citizens,
including Government servants. But it is, however, necessary
to remember that Article 19 confers fundamental rights which
are not absolute but are subject to reasonable restrictions.
What has happened in this case is only to impose  reasonable
restrictions in the interest of discipline and public order.
357
    13.	 The validity of the impugned rule has to be  judged
keeping in mind the character of the employees we are  deal-
ing with. It is true that the rules impose a restriction  on
the  right to form association. It virtually compels a	Gov-
ernment	 servant to withdraw his membership of the  associa-
tion as soon as recognition accorded to the said association
is  withdrawn  or if, after the association  is	 formed,  no
recognition  is accorded to it within six months.  In  other
words,	the right to form an association is  conditioned  by
the existence of the recognition of the said association  by
the  Government. If the association affairs recognition	 and
continues  to enjoy it, Government servants can become	mem-
bers  of the said association; if the said association	does
not  secure recognition from the Government  or	 recognition
granted	 to it is withdrawn, Government servants must  cease
to  be	members of the said association. That is  the  plain
effect	of the impugned rule. These rules are  protected  by
Articles  33 and 19(4) of the Constitution. Besides,  it  is
settled law that the right guaranteed by Article 19(1)(c) to
form  associations  does not involve a guaranteed  right  to
recognition also.
    14.	 The  main grievance of the appellants is  that	 the
first  appellant-Sangh when recognised, comprised of  Police
Officers of various ranks, the common factor being that	 all
its members were non-gazetted police officers. This composi-
tion  was  changed by the impugned rules. Not  only  is	 the
composition changed; the entire Sangh stood derecognised for
failure	 to  alter its constitution complying with  the	 new
rules. This attack cannot be sustained. Section 3 of the Act
permits	 the  rule making authority to define any  group  of
Police	Force  that can form an Association. It	 also  gives
power  to prescribe the nature of activity that	 each'	such
association  of members can indulge in. It, therefore,	fol-
lows  that  if rules can be framed defining this  aspect,  a
rule can also be framed enabling the authorities to  revoked
or  cancel  recognition	 once accorded,	 if  the  activities
offended the rules.
    15. The further grievance of the appellant is that	non-
gazetted  officers who once formed one block have been	fur-
ther divided with reference to ranks and that this again  is
an  inroad  into their right under  Article  19(1)(c).	This
submission  has been already met. Besides, this	 classifica-
tion  based on ranking has its own rationale behind  it.  We
are  dealing  with a Force in which discipline is  the	most
important  pre-requisite. Non-gazetted officers	 consist  of
men  of	 all ranks; the lowest cadre and  officers  who	 are
superior  to  them.  If all  the  nongazetted  officers	 are
grouped together irrespective of rank, it is bound to affect
discipline.  It was perhaps, realising the need to  preserve
discipline  that the changes in the rule were  effected.  We
are  not satisfied that there has been violation of any	 law
in doing so.
358
    On a careful consideration of the questions involved  in
this  appeal, we hold that the High Court was right  in	 its
decision. We accordingly dismiss the appeal.
S.R.						      Appeal
dismissed.
359




