

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Government Of Tamilnadu vs Ahobila Matam on 17 November, 1986Equivalent citations: 1987 AIR  245, 1987 SCR  (1) 232
Author: O C Reddy
Bench: Reddy, O. Chinnappa (J)
           PETITIONER:
GOVERNMENT OF TAMILNADU

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
AHOBILA MATAM

DATE OF JUDGMENT17/11/1986

BENCH:
REDDY, O. CHINNAPPA (J)
BENCH:
REDDY, O. CHINNAPPA (J)
OZA, G.L. (J)

CITATION:
 1987 AIR  245		  1987 SCR  (1) 232
 1987 SCC  (1)	38	  JT 1986   858
 1986 SCALE  (2)841


ACT:
    Madras   Inams   (Assessment)  Act,	  1956:	  s.   3(1),
proviso--Exemption   to	  inam	lands	held   on   'service
tenure'--Whether available to lands held by religious insti-
tutions.
    Expression	'service  tenure' in relation  to  religious
institution-Whether  includes lands granted for	 performance
of worship.
    Constitution of India, Article 26: Imposition of assess-
ment	on   land   held   by	 religious    denominational
institutions--Whether violates fundamental right.



HEADNOTE:
    The proviso to s. 3(1) of the Madras Inams	(Assessment)
Act,  1956 provides that no assessment shall be leviable  in
the  case  of  an inam granted on service  tenure  which  is
proved to consist of an assignment of land revenue only.
    Certain  lands were granted to the respondent  Matam  by
one  of the Tanjore Princess. The purpose of the  grant	 was
not  known  but it was presumed to have been  made  for	 the
benefit of the Matam. The original grantee was the then Jeer
of  the	 Matam. The Inam Title Deed granted in 1881  by	 the
Inam Commissioner acknowledged the title of the Matam to  'a
religious endowment or a Matam Inam consisting of the  right
to  the	 Government Revenue on the said land  held  for	 the
support of the Matam' and confirmed the Inam to the  Manager
and his successor tax free.
    Consequent on the enactment of the Madras Inams (Assess-
ment) Act, 1956 the Revenue Divisional Officer made an order
in  1963  levying  full assessment on the  lands.  The	writ
petition  filed by the Matam against that order was  allOWed
by the High Court on the ground that the proviso to s.	3(1)
of  the Act prevented the levy of full assessment  on  lands
held on service tenure. It took the view that the expression
'service tenure' was not to be restricted to a service	Inam
and  that  it would include any grant for the support  of  a
religious or charitable institution.
233
    In	appeal	to this Court under Art.  133(1)(c)  of	 the
Constitution, it was contended for the respondent Matam that
the  imposition of full assessment on lands held by a  reli-
gions  institution would be hit by Art. 26 of the  Constitu-
tion.
Allowing the appeal by the State, the Court,
    HELD:  The proviso to s. 3(1) of the Madras	 Inams	(As-
sessment)  Act,	 1956  is not applicable to  lands  held  by
religious  institutions-  The inam lands  in  question	are,
therefore, liable to full assessment. [237A]
    Three possible views have been taken of the grants	made
in  connection with religions institutions: first, that	 the
land  was granted to the institution; secondly, that it	 was
intended to be attached to a particular office; and thirdly,
that  it  was granted to a named individual,  burdened	with
service,  the  person so named happening to  be	 the  office
holder	at the time of the grant. This	distinction  between
grants	to  institutions  as such and grants  made  for	 the
performance of service either by attaching the service to  a
particular  office or by naming the individual	grantee	 and
burdening the grant with service, the named individual being
the holder of an office, for the the time being, places	 the
former in a category different from service inams. [236-D]
    In	the  instant case, the lands were  granted  for	 the
benefit of the Matam. They fall in the first category. These
cannot, therefore, be considered as lands subject to service
tenure. [234H, 236G]
    Subramania	v.  Kailasanatha, AIR 1934  Madras  258	 and
Hindu  Religious  Endowments  Board,  Madras  v.  Thadikonda
Koteswara Rao, AIR 1937 Madras 852, applied.
    The High Court was not right in interpreting the expres-
sion  'service tenure' by referring to s. 44B of the  Madras
Hindu  Religious Endowments Act, 1927 (Act 2 of 1927)  where
that expression is in fact not used at all. The	 classifica-
tion  of grants for the benefit of a  religious	 institution
along with other service inams by Paragraph 54 of the Stand-
ing  Orders of the Board of Revenue also does not throw	 any
light  on  the	interpretation of  the	expression  'service
tenure' in Madras Inams (Assessment) Act. The expression has
to  be construed with reference to the object of the Act  to
impose	full  assessment on inam lands	hitherto  wholly  or
partly exempt from levy of land revenue. [236H, 235H-236-B]
The  mere imposition of assessment on lands held by a  reli-
gious
234
denominational institution cannot attract the right  guaran-
teed by Art. 26. The burden imposed is a burden to be shared
in  the	 same manner by all the owners of the lands  in	 the
State and not a special burden imposed on the denominational
institution.  Burdens of that nature are outside  the  right
guaranteed by Art. 26. [237C]



JUDGMENT:
    CIVIL  APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No:  446  of
1973
    From  the  Judgment and Order dated	 18.11.1970  of	 the
Madras High Court in Writ Appeal No. 389 of 1967.
M.M. Abdul Khader and A.V. Rangam for the Appellant.
K. Ram Kumar and Mrs. J. Ramachandran for the Respondent.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
    CHINNAPPA  REDDY,  J. This appeal is  by  a	 certificate
granted by the Madras High Court under Art. 133(1)(c) of the
Constitution. The appellant is the State of Tamil Nadu.	 The
respondent  is	the Ahobila Matam, a  well  known  religious
institution.  The question relates to the  applicability  of
the  Tamil  Nadu Inams (Assessment) Act, 1956 in  regard  to
some  lands  situated in  Narasimhapuram,  Papanasam  Taluk,
Thanjavur  District belonging to the institution. The  lands
are  covered by Inam Title Deed No.2214 dated July 29,	1881
granted by the Inam Commissioner to the Manager for the time
being  of  Sri Ahobila Matam. By the title  deed,  the	Inam
Commissioner, by order of the Governor-in-Council of  Madras
acting	on  behalf of the Secretary of State  for  India  in
Council,  acknowledged the title of the Ahobila Matam to  "a
religious endowment or a Matam Inam consisting of the  right
to the Government Revenue on land claimed to be acres  28.11
cents  of dry, 58.38 acres of wet and 6.83 acres  of  garden
and situated in the whole village of Narasimhapuram  besides
Poramboke in the taluk of Kumbakonam District of Tanjore and
held for the support of the Ahobila Matam" and confirmed the
Inam to the Manager for the time being of the Ahobila  Matam
and his successor "tax free to be held without	interference
so  long as the conditions are duly fulfilled." The  extract
of  the	 Inam Fair Register mentioned in Column 8  that	 the
grant  was made by one of the Tanjore Princes, but that	 the
purpose of the grant was not known. It was presumed that the
inam  was conferred for the benefit of the Matam. Column  13
mentioned  the original grantee as the Ahobilam	 Servatantra
Sri
235
Srinivasa Swami, apparently, the then Jeer of the Matam. The
recommendation	of  the Inam Commissioner in Column  22	 was
that  the  title deed should be issued in the  name  of	 the
priest	for the time being of the Ahobila Matam. It  was  in
pursuance of this recommendation that Inam Title Deed No. 22
14  was	 issued. Consequent on the enactment of	 the  Madras
Inams(Assessment) Act, 1956, the Revenue Divisional Officer,
Kumbakonam made an order on February. 28, 1963 levying	full
assessment  on	the lands. The levy of	the  assessment	 was
questioned  by the Ahobila Matam by a Writ Petition  in	 the
Madras High Court. First, a learned Single Judge and then, a
Division  Bench of Madras High Court quashed the  assessment
on  the ground that the proviso to s.3 (1) of the  Act	pre-
vented the levy of full assessment of lands held on  service
tenure. The proviso to s. 3(1) of the Act is in the  follow-
ing terms:--
"Provided  that	 in the case of an Inam granted	 on  service
tenure	which is proved to consist of an assignment of	land
revenue only, no assessment under this sub-section shall  be
leviable,  and the inamdar shall be liable to pay  only	 the
quit-rent, Jodi, Kattubadi or other amount of a like nature,
if any, which he has been paying before the commencement  of
this Act."
    The	 question for consideration, therefore,	 is  whether
the  Inam  was granted on 'service tenure'. The	 High  Court
took  the view that the expression 'service tenure' was	 not
to be restricted to a service inam and that it would include
any  grant  for	 the support of a  religious  or  charitable
institution.  For  that purpose reliance was placed  on	 the
classification of inams in the Standing Orders of the  Board
of Revenue. The Standing Orders divided inams into unenfran-
chised	service	 inams and  unenfranchised  personal  inams.
Under the heading of unenfranchised service inams, religious
and charitable inams were dealt with in Paragraph 54.  Para-
graph  54 enjoined a duty on the Collector to see  that	 the
inams confirmed by the Inam Commissioner for the benefit  of
or for service to be rendered to any religious or charitable
institution  or for the maintenance of irrigation  works  or
other works of public utility; were not enjoyed without	 the
terms of the grant being fulfilled. Religious and charitable
inams  were further classified and in the first category  we
get  inams granted for the support or maintenance  of  Hindu
religious institutions, inams granted for the performance of
a charity or service connected with Hindu religious institu-
tions  and  inams  granted for any  other  Hindu  charitable
trust.	In the second category came the other inams.  We  do
not think that the classification of grants
236
for the benefit of a religious institution along with  other
service inams by Paragraph 54 of the Board's Standing Orders
throws light on the interpretation of the expression  'serv-
ice  tenure' in Madras Inams Assessment Act. The  expression
'service'  in  connection with	religious  institutions	 has
acquired  a  special and significant meaning and we  do	 not
think that we will be justified in ignoring the well  under-
stood  meaning given to the expressions 'service inams'	 and
'service  tenure'  over decades of years. We must  not	also
forget that the object of Madras Inams Assessment Act was to
impose	full  assessment on Inam lands	hitherto  wholly  or
partly	exempt	from levy of land revenue. As  far  back  as
1934,  the Madras High Court in Subramania  v.	Kailasanatha
AIR  1934  Madras 258 (Venkata Subba Rao, J.),	pointed	 out
that there were three possible views that might be taken  of
grants	made  in  connection  with  religious  institutions:
"First,	 that the land was granted to the institution,	sec-
ondly,	that it was intended to be attached to a  particular
office, and thirdly, that it was granted to a named individ-
ual,  burdened with service, the person so named,  happening
to  be	the office-holder, at the time of  the	grant.	This
distinction  between  grants  to institutions  as  such	 and
grants made for the performance of service either by attach-
ing  the  service to a particular office or  by	 naming	 the
individual grantee and burdening the grant with service, the
named individual being the holder of an office, for the time
being. In Hindu Religious Endowments Board, Madras v. Thadi-
konda  Koteswara Rao, AIR 1937 Madras 852, a Division  Bench
of  the	 Madras	 High Court considered a  number  of  grants
bearing these distinctions in mind. Where the grant was "for
the  worship of the idol in the pagoda" or "for	 the  nithya
naivedya  deeparathana" or "for the offering of	 daily	nai-
vaidyam	 and  deeparathana", the grants	 were  construed  as
grants	in  favour of the institution and not as  grants  in
favour	of  the office-holder or  individual  burdened	with
service.  In  other words, such grants were not	 treated  as
service	 inams but as grants in favour of institutions.	 The
decision  in Hindu Religious Endowments Board  v.  Koteswara
Rao,  (supra),	is the leading case on the subject  and	 has
been  followed	consistently all these years by	 the  Madras
High  Court.  Lands granted to religious  institutions	(not
either	to  the office-holder or to an	individual  burdened
with service) for the performance of worship in a temple  or
math have never been considered as lands subject to 'service
tenure'. The High Court referred to s. 44(B) of Madras Act 2
of  1927. We find ourselves unable to derive any  assistance
from that provision. Section 44B provided for resumption and
regrant of inams granted for the support or maintenance of a
math or for the performance of charity or service  connected
with  a	 math or temple. We do not think that  it  would  be
proper	for us to interpret the expression 'service  tenure'
by refer-
237
ring  S. 44B of the Madras Act 2 of 1927 where that  expres-
sion  is in fact not used at all. We are, therefore, of	 the
view  that the proviso to s. 3(1) is inapplicable  to  lands
held by religious institutions and, therefore, the lands are
liable to full assessment.
    Shri  Ram  Kumar,  learned counsel	for  the  respondent
argued that the imposition of full assessment on lands	held
by  the religious institution in the present case  would  be
hit  by	 Art. 26 of the Constitution which  gives  to  every
religious.denomination the right to own and acquire  movable
and  immovable	property  and to  administer  such  property
inaccordance  with law. We are unable to understand how	 the
mere  imposition of assessment on lands held by a  religious
denominational	institution can possibly attract  the  right
guaranteed  by the Art. 26 of the Constitution.	 The  burden
imposed	 is a burden to be shared in the same manner by	 all
the  owners  of	 the lands in the State and  not  a  special
burden imposed on the denominational institution. Burden  of
that  nature are outside the right guaranteed by Art. 26  of
the Constitution. The appeal is, therefore, allowed and	 the
orders of the learned single Judge and the Division Bench of
the Madras High Court are set aside. The writ petition filed
in the High Court is dismissed.
P.S.S.						      Appeal
allowed.
238




