

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Sidhosons & Anr. Etc. Etc vs Union Of India & Ors. Etc. Etc on 28 October, 1986Equivalent citations: 1987 AIR   61, 1987 SCR  (1)	 82
Author: M Thakkar
Bench: Thakkar, M.P. (J)
           PETITIONER:
SIDHOSONS & ANR. ETC. ETC.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
UNION OF INDIA & ORS. ETC. ETC.

DATE OF JUDGMENT28/10/1986

BENCH:
THAKKAR, M.P. (J)
BENCH:
THAKKAR, M.P. (J)
RAY, B.C. (J)

CITATION:
 1987 AIR   61		  1987 SCR  (1)	 82
 1987 SCC  (1)	25	  JT 1986   791
 1986 SCALE  (2)737
 CITATOR INFO :
 RF	    1990 SC 202	 (9)


ACT:
    Central  Excise  and  Salt Act,  1944,  s.	2(f)--Market
value--What   is--For	payment	  of   excise	 duty--Brand
name--Value of--When includible.



HEADNOTE:
    The	 petitinner-company  in	 W.P. No. 1685	of  1979  is
manufacturing  electrical goods for M/s.  Bajaj	 Electricals
Limited,  the buyers. As per agreement the goods are not  at
all  sold  .in the open market	by  the	 petitioner-company.
After the manufactured goods are accepted by the buyers, the
petitioner-company  applies the label of the brand  name  of
the  buyers, namely, 'BajaJ' on the manufactured goods.	 The
right  to sell these goods with the aforesaid brand name  is
solely	and exclusively that of the buyers having regard  to
the fact that they alone are owners of the brand name.
    Counsel  for the petitioner in this writ  petition	con-
tended	that the market value of the goods  manufactured  by
the petitioner should be assessed at the price at which	 the
goods are agreed to be sold under the agreement between	 the
manufacturer  and  the	buyers. On the other  hand,  it	 was
argued by counsel in behalf of the respondent-Union of India
that  the excise duty must be levied an the basis of  market
value  fetched by the sale of these goods by the  buyers  to
their  wholesalers.  Similar question of law  arose  in	 the
other writ petitions.
Allowing the writ petitions, this Cart,
    HELD:  1.1. Excise duty is payable on the market  value'
fetched by the goods, in the wholesale market at the factory
gate  manufactured  by the manufacturers. It cannot  he	 as-
sessed	on  the	 hams of the market value  obtained  by	 the
buyers	who also add to the value of the manufactured  goods
the  value  of	their own property in the  goodwill  of	 the
'Brand name'. [84F]
    1.2. Where a manufacturer who manufacture and sells	 his
goods  under his own brand name or under a bland name  which
he  has	 acquired in use, the sale price  fetched  by  sales
effected by him under
83
such bland name in wholesale, will be the basis for computa-
tion  of  excise duty payable by him. So also  nothing	said
herein	will  come to the rescue of a brand name  owner	 who
himself	 is the manufacturer of goods or to  sales  effected
favour	of 'related' persons as defined by the	Central	 Ex-
cises and Salt Act, 1944. [85A-B]
    Union  of  India v. Cibatul Ltd., [1985] 22	 E.L.T	302,
Joint Secretary to the Government of India v. Food Speciali-
ties Ltd., [1985] 22 E.L.T 324 'and M/s. R.O. Industries  v.
Union of India & Ors., Civil Appeal No. 1496 of 1977 decided
on 3.4.86, relied upon.
    In	the  instant case, the price fetched  by  the  goods
manufactured  by the petitioner-company is the price  Of*the
electrical goods sans the brand name. And that should be the
market	value for the purposes of assessing the excise	duty
payable	 by  the petitioner-company which  manufactures	 the
excisable  goods. The enhancement in the value the goods  by
reason	of the application of the brand name is	 because  of
the  augmentation attributable to the value of the  goodwill
of the brand name which does not belong to the	manufacturer
and  which added market value does not accrue to  the  peti-
tioner-company	or  go into its coffers. It accrues  to	 the
buyers to whom the brand name belongs and to whom the fruits
of the goodwill belong. [89D-E]



JUDGMENT:
ORIGINAL JURISDICTION: Writ Petition No. 1685-1691 of
1979
Under Article 32 of the Constitution of India.
Soli J. Sorabjee and K.C. Dua for the Petitioners.
    V.	Parthasarthy, Girish Chandra and C.V. Subba Rao	 for
the Respondents.
The Order of the Court was delivered by
    THAKKAR,,J.	 The question raised in this  Writ  Petition
under Article 32 of the Constitution of India as regards the
determination of the market value of the goods	manufactured
by the petitioner company for the purposes of computation of
the  excise  duty  leviable on	the  same.  The	 petitioners
(manufacturers)	 are manufacturing electrical goods under  a
contract with another company known as the Bajaj Electricals
Ltd.  (here-after  referred  to as  buyers).  The  agreement
between the parties provides for the buyers having the right
to reject the
84
goods  if the goods are not in accordance with	the  buyers'
specifications or do not come up to the stipulated  standard
of  quality.  After the manufactured goods are	tested,	 ap-
proved	and accepted, by the buyers the manufacturers  apply
the  label  of the brand name of the buyers  (in  this	case
'Bajaj') on the manufactured goods. The petitioners  contend
that  the  market  value of the goods  manufactured  by	 the
petitioners  should  be assessed at the price at  which	 the
goods are agreed to be sold under the agreement between	 the
manufacturers and the buyers. On the other hand the respond-
ent  contents  that the excise duty must be  levied  on	 the
basis of the market value fetched by the sale of these goods
by  the buyers to their wholesalers. The goods	manufactured
by the Petitioner Company, which are accepted by the  buyers
and  to	 which the brand name label 'Bajaj' is	applied	 are
sold  by the manufacturers to the buyers at  the  stipulated
price and to none-else. They are not at all sold in the open
market	by the manufacturers. The right to sell these  goods
with  the brand name is solely and exclusively that  of	 the
buyers	having	regard to the fact that they alone  are	 the
owners	of the brand name 'Bajaj'. The price fetched by	 the
goods manufactured by the petitioner company is the price of
the electrical goods 'sans' the brand name. And that  should
be the market value for the purposes of assessing the excise
duty  payable by the petitioner company	 which	manufactures
the  excisable	goods. The enhancement in the value  of	 the
goods  by  reasons of the application of the brand  name  is
because of the augmentation attributable to the value of the
goodwill  of  the brand name which does not  belong  to	 the
manufacturers  and which added market value does not  accrue
to the petitioner company or go into its coffers. It accrues
to the buyers to whom the brand name belongs and to whom  to
fruits of the goodwill belong. Excise duty is payable on the
market	value fetched by the goods, in the wholesale  market
at  the factory gate manufactured by the  manufacturers.  It
cannot be assessed on the basis of the market value obtained
by the buyers who also add to the value of the	manufactured
goods the value of their own property in the goodwill of the
'brand	name'--The Petitioners are therefore right  and	 the
respondents  wrong. This point is covered by  earlier  deci-
sions  of this Court, namely, (1) Union of India v.  Cibatul
Ltd.,  [1985]  22  E.L.T. 302, (2) Joint  Secretary  to	 the
Government  of	India v. Food specialities Ltd.,  [1985]  22
E.L.T. 324 and (3) Civil Appeal No. 1496 of 1977 disposed of
by  a  Bench of three Judges of this Court by  its  judgment
dated  3rd April, 1986. The petition must therefore  be	 al-
lowed.	The respondents shall levy excise duty on the  basis
of  the	 price charged by the manufacturers  to	 the  buyers
namely	M/s.  Bajaj Electricals Ltd. A word  of	 caution  is
however called for. Our decision must be understood correct-
ly--not misunderstood conveniently. We, there-
85
fore,  clarify	that  our pronouncement will  not  enable  a
manufacturer who manufactures and sells his goods under	 his
own brand name or under a brand name which he has acquired a
right to use. In such a case the sale price fetched by sales
effected  by him under such brand name in wholesale will  be
the basis for computation of excise duty payable. by him--So
also nothing said herein will come to the rescue of a  brand
name  owner who himself is the manufacturer of goods  or  to
sales effected in favour of 'related' persons as defined  by
the  Act.  The Central Excises & Salt Act,  1944.  The	Bank
guarantee,  if	any,  furnished by the	petitioners  in	 the
context of the present Writ Petition will stand	 discharged.
No Other point has been argued. The petition is allowed	 and
the Rule is made absolute to the aforesaid extent. The	Writ
Petition is disposed of accordingly. There will be no  order
as to costs.
    Writ  Petitions  Nos. 1686-1691 of 1979 raise  the	same
point  in the context of other brand names. These  petitions
will also stand disposed of in terms of this order with	 the
same  direction regarding computation of levy and  discharge
of guarantee bonds and with no order as to costs.
M.L.A.					      Petition	 al-
lowed.
86




