

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Rakesh Chand Narain vs State Of Bihar on 20 October, 1986Equivalent citations: 1986 (2) SCALE 739, 1986 Supp (1) SCC 576
Bench: G Oza, V B Eradi
ORDER
  

1. After hearing both sides, we pass the following interim directions in this case to be given effect to forthwith by the State of Bihar:

(1) In respect of each patient in the Ranchi Mansik Arogya Shala the daily allocation for diet will be increased from the existing inadequate figure of only Rs. 3.50 to Rs. 10/- per day per patient and dietory articles of that value shall be supplied to each patient.

(2) Arrangements should be made forthwith to supply adequate quantity of pure drinking water to the hospital, if necessary, by engaging water tankers to transport potable water from outside.

(3) Immediate arrangements should be made for the restoration of proper sanitary conditions in the laboratories and bathrooms of the hospital.

(4) All patients in the hospital who are not at present having mattresses and blankets should be immediately supplied the same within 15 days from today. Such of the patients who have not been given cots should also be provided cots within 6 weeks from today so that no patient shall be thereafter without a cot.

(5) The ceiling limit at present in vogue in respect of cost of medicines allowable for each patient will stand removed, with immediate effect and the patients will be supplied medicines according to the prescription made by the Doctors irrespective of the costs.

(6) The State Government shall forthwith take steps to appoint a qualified Psychiatrist and a Medical Superintendent for the hospital and they should be posted and take charge in the Institution within six weeks from today.

2. The Chief Judicial Magistrate, Ranchi to whom a copy of this order will be forwarded by the Registry shall visit the hospital once in 3 weeks and submit quarterly reports to this Court as to whether the aforesaid directions given by us are being complied with.

3. Notice will issue to the States of West Bengal and Orissa calling upon them to submit their counter affidavits within 4 weeks from today.

4. List this case for further orders after six weeks from today.

