

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Kasturi Lal Harlal vs State Of U.P. & Ors on 29 October, 1986Equivalent citations: 1987 AIR   27, 1987 SCR  (1)	 86
Author: P Bhagwati
Bench: Bhagwati, P.N. (Cj), Misra Rangnath, Khalid, V. (J), Oza, G.L. (J), Dutt, M.M. (J)
           PETITIONER:
KASTURI LAL HARLAL

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF U.P. & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT29/10/1986

BENCH:
BHAGWATI, P.N. (CJ)
BENCH:
BHAGWATI, P.N. (CJ)
MISRA RANGNATH
KHALID, V. (J)
OZA, G.L. (J)
DUTT, M.M. (J)

CITATION:
 1987 AIR   27		  1987 SCR  (1)	 86
 1986 SCC  (4) 704	  JT 1986   749
 1986 SCALE  (2)708


ACT:
    U.P.  Sales Tax Act, 1948: s.29-A--Provision for  refund
to  buyers  of amount realised as tax by  a  dealer--Whether
constitutionally valid.



HEADNOTE:
    Section 29-A of the U.P. Sales Tax Act, 1948 inserted by
s.  I7 of the U.P. Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 1969	pro-
vided for refund of the amount, realised by a dealer as	 tax
on sale of goods and deposited under sub-s.(4) or  sub-s.(5)
of s.8-A of the Act, to the person from whom such dealer had
actually realised the same, and to no other
    Coal became a taxable commodity under the U.P. Sales Tax
Act for the first time on 1st October 1965. The	 appellants,
who were registered as dealers in coal under the Act, on the
assumption  that  sales tax was payable by them on  sale  of
coal  from and after 1st October 1965, corrected amounts  by
way  of	 sales tax from the purchasers and  submitted  their
returns	 for the assessment year 1965-66 after depositing  a
sum  representing the amount of tax payable by them  in	 ac-
cordance with their returns. The Sales Tax Officer, however,
found  that  no sales tax was payable by the  appellants  on
sale of coal under the Act. The appellants thereupon claimed
refund	of  the amount deposited but the Sales	Tax  Officer
rejected their claim under s.29-A of the Act.
    A  Writ  Petition challenging the  correctness  of	that
order and the constitutional vires of s.29-A was rejected by
the High Court.
Dismissing the appeal by certificate, the Court,
    HELD:  Section  29-A  of the U.P. Sales  Tax  Act,	1948
introduced  by s. I7 of the U.P. Taxation  Laws	 (Amendment)
Act,  1969  fails within the legislative competence  of	 the
State Legislature and is constitutionally valid. [9OF, 89F]
    Clause  (3)	 of Art.246 of the  Constitution  read	with
Entry 54 in List H of the Seventh Schedule thereto  empowers
the State Legislature
87
to  make laws with respect to taxes on the sale or  purchase
of goods. An Entry in a Legislative List must be read in its
widest	amplitude and the legislature must be held  to	have
power  not  only to legislate with respect  to	the  subject
matter of the entry but also to make ancillary or incidental
provision  in aid of the main topic of	legislation-  Taking
over  of  sums collected by dealers from  the  public  under
guise  of  tax solely with a view to returning them  to	 the
buyers	so deprived is necessarily incidental to tax on	 the
sale and purchase of goods. The enactment of s.29-A can thus
he  said  to  be justified as exercise of  an  ancillary  or
incidental  power of legislation under Entry 54. [89G,	90D,
89H]
R.S. Joshi v; A}it Mills, [1978] 1 SCR 338, followed.
    Ashoka Marketing Ltd. v. State of Bihar & Anr., [1970] 3
SCR 455, dissented from.
R. Abdul Qader & Co. v. Sales Tax Officer, Hyderabad, [1964]
6  SCR	867, Orient Paper Mills Ltd., v. State of  Orissa  &
Ors., [1962] 1 SCR 549 and State of Orissa v. Orissa  Cement
Ltd. & Ors., [1985] Suppl. SCC 608, referred to.



JUDGMENT:
    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 1862 (NT)
of 1971.
    From  the Judgment & Order dated 13.7.1970 of  the	High
Court  of  Allahabad at Lucknow Bench in Writ  Petition	 No.
849/70.
Ms. Lira Goswami and D.N. Mishra for the Appellants.
    A.D. Singh, Mrs. Ashok K. Gupta, Raj Singh Rana, Mrs. S.
Dikshit and B .P. Maheshwari for the Respondents.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     BHAGWATI, CJ. This appeal by certificate raises a short
question  as to the constitutional validity of section	29-A
of  the	 U.P. Sales Tax Act, 1948. This section,  which	 was
introduced in the U.P. Sales Tax Act, 1948 by section 17  of
the U.P. Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 1969, has been	held
to  be	constitutionally valid by a Division  Bench  of	 the
Allahabad  High	 Court	on 13th July  1970.  The  appellants
question  the  correctness of this view taken  by  the	High
Court.
The appellants carry on business as dealers in coal and they
are
88
registered as such under the U.P. Sales Tax Act, 1948. Prior
to  1st October 1965, there was no sales tax levied on	sale
of  coal  and for the first time on 1st October	 1965,	coal
became	a  taxable commodity under the U.P. Sales  Tax	Act,
1948.  The appellants, proceeding on the footing that  sales
tax  was payable by them on sale of coal from and after	 1st
October 1965, collected amounts-by way of sales tax from the
purchasers  and submitted their returns for  the  assessment
year 1965-66 after depositing a sum of Rs. 10,073.86  repre-
senting the amount of tax payable by them in accordance with
their  returns.	 It was, however, found as a result  of	 the
assessment order made by the Sales Tax Officer on 28th March
1970  that  no sales tax was payable by	 the  appellants  on
sales of coal under the U.P. Sales Tax Act, 1948. The appel-
lants  thereupon claimed refund of the sum of Rs.  10,073.86
but  the  Sales Tax Officer rejected the claim made  by	 the
appellants on the ground that by reason of section 29-A,  no
refund was claimable by the appellants and the only  persons
entitled to claim refund were those from whom the appellants
had  collected	the tax. This order made by  the  Sales	 Tax
Officer	 was challenged by the appellants by filing  a	writ
petition  in the High Court of Allahabad and  the  principal
ground on which the correctness of this order was challenged
was  that section 29-A was ultra vires as being outside	 the
legislative  competence of the State Legislature.  The	High
Court negatived this challenge and upheld the constitutional
validity  of  section 29-A and on this view,  sustained	 the
order  made by the Sales Tax Officer. The appellants  there-
upon  preferred the present appeal after obtaining  certifi-
cate of fitness from the High Court.
    It	is necessary at this stage to set out  the  relevant
provisions of the U.P. Sales Tax Act, 1948 as they stood  at
the  material time. Subsection (4) of section 8-A  made	 the
following provision:
		  "(4)	Without prejudice to the  provisions
	      of  clause (f) of section 14, the amount	rea-
	      lised  by	 any person as tax on  sale  of	 any
	      goods,  shall, notwithstanding  anything	con-
	      tained in any other provision of this Act,  be
	      deposited	 by  him in  a	Government  treasury
	      within  such period as may be  prescribed,  if
	      the  amount  so realised	exceeds	 the  amount
	      payable  as tax in respect of that sale or  if
	      no tax is payable in respect thereof."
Sub-section  (5) was added in section 8-A by section  11  of
the U.P. Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 1965 and it read  as
follows:
89
	      "(5) Where a dealer is found not liable to  be
	      assessed	to  tax by reason  of  his  turnover
	      being  less  than the amount specified  in  or
	      under section 3, or sub-section (1) or (2)  of
	      section  18, but has realised any tax as	such
	      in  respect of such turnover, he	shall,	not-
	      withstanding  anything contained in this	Act,
	      be liable to pay the same to the State Govern-
	      ment  and shall deposit it into  the  treasury
	      within  30  days of the date of the  order  by
	      which  he was found not so liable,  unless  it
	      has already been so deposited."
Since,	having regard to the judgment of this Court,  in  R.
Abdul Qader & Co. v. Sales Tax Officer, Hyderabad, [1964]  6
SCR 867 it was doubtful whether sub-sections (4) and (5)  of
section	 8-A, standing by themselves, would fail within	 the
legislative  competence	 of the State  Legislature.  Section
29-A was inserted in the U.P. Sales Tax Act, 1948 by section
17 of the Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act 1969:
	      Refund  in  Special  Cases--   Notwithstanding
	      anything contained in this Act or in any other
	      law  for	the time being in force	 or  in	 any
	      judgment, decree or order of any court,  where
	      any amount is either deposited or paid by	 any
	      dealer  or other person under sub-section	 (4)
	      or sub-section (5) of section 8 A, such amount
	      or  any  part thereof shall on a	claim  being
	      made  in that behalf in such form	 and  within
	      such period as may be prescribed, be  refunded
	      to  the  person from whom such dealer  or	 the
	      person  had actually realised such  amount  or
	      part, and to no other person."
The  question  is whether this section, as it stood  at	 the
material  time	in the form in which it	 was  introduced  by
section 17 of the U.P. Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act,  1969,
was within the legislative competence of the State  Legisla-
ture.
    The only entry under which section 29-A was sought to be
brought	 was Entry 54 in List II of the Seventh Schedule  to
the  Constitution. Clause (3) of Article 246 read with	this
entry  empowers	 the  State Legislature to  make  laws	with
respect to taxes on the sale or purchase of goods. It is now
well  settled  that an entry in a Legislative List  must  be
read  in  its widest amplitude and the legislature  must  be
held to have power not only to legislate with respect to the
subject	 matter of the entry but also to make  ancillary  or
incidental  provision in aid of the main topic	of  legisla-
tion. Can section 29-A be justified as exercise of an ancil-
lary or incidental power of legislation under Entry 547 Now,
90
this question is no longer res integra. It stands  concluded
by  the decision of this Court in R.S. Joshi v. Ajit  Mills,
[1978]	1 SCR 338. It is no doubt true that the decision  of
this  Court  in Ashoka Marketing Ltd. v. State	of  Bihar  &
Anr.,  [1970] 3 SCR 455 does seem to indicate that a  provi-
sion such as s. 29-A would not be justifiable as an exercise
of  incidental or ancillary power. There also, the  impugned
legislative  provision,	 namely, section 20-A of  the  Bihar
Sales  Tax  Act was very similar to section  29-A  and	this
Court  held that it fell outside the legislative  competence
of  the	 State Legislature. The Court  in  Ashoka  Marketing
Ltd,'s	case (supra) did not follow the decision  in  Orient
Paper Mills Ltd. v. State of Orissa & Ors., [1962] 1 SCR 549
where  a similar provision was attacked on the	same  ground
but the attack was repelled by the Court. If the decision in
Ashoka Marketing Ltd. 's case (supra) were to be regarded as
good  law,  lsection 29-A would have to be  struck  down  as
being outside the legislative competence of the State Legis-
lature. But this Court in R.S. Joshi's case (supra)  clearly
and  categorically  disapproved of the	decision  in  Ashoka
Marketing  Company's case and reaffirmed the view  taken  in
Orient	Paper Mill's case (supra). The Court held  that	 the
taking	over  of sums collected by dealers from	 the  public
under guise of tax solely with a view to return them to	 the
buyers so deprived is necessarily incidental to 'tax on	 the
sale and purchase of goods'. Such a provision is  manifestly
a  consumer  protection measure since "while  suits  against
dealers to recover paltry sums by a large number of  custom-
ers  would lead to endless and expensive litigation, a	sim-
pler  process of returning those sums on application by	 the
relevant  purchasers  would protect the common	buyer  while
depriving the dealers of their unjust-gains." This Court  in
a  subsequent decision in State of Orissa v.  Orissa  Cement
Ltd.  &	 Ors., [1985] Suppl. S.C.C. 608 also took  the	same
view  and pointed out that the decision in Ashoka  Marketing
Ltd.  's  case (supra) was expressly dissented from  by	 the
decision in R.S. Joshi's case (supra). The decision in	R.S.
Joshi's case (supra) must, therefore, be regarded as laying-
down the correct law on the subject and if that be so. it is
obvious	 that section 29-A must be held to fall	 within	 the
legislative  competence	 of the State  Legislature  and	 its
constitutional validity must be upheld.
    The	 appeal must, therefore, be dismissed. but since  it
was  filed at a time when the position in law  was  nebulous
and  had  not been finally settled by the decision  in	R.S.
Joshi's case (supra) we would direct that there shall be  no
order as to costs.
P.S.S.						      Appeal
dismissed.
91




