

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Manik Vinayak Pathare (Dead)By ... vs Pandurang Ganpat Thakar & Ors on 20 December, 1986Equivalent citations: 1987 AIR  668, 1987 SCR  (1) 867
Author: P Bhagwati
Bench: Bhagwati, P.N. (Cj), Misra Rangnath, Khalid, V. (J), Oza, G.L. (J), Dutt, M.M. (J)
           PETITIONER:
MANIK VINAYAK PATHARE (DEAD)BY RASIK KARSANDAS MAKHECHA

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
PANDURANG GANPAT THAKAR & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT20/12/1986

BENCH:
BHAGWATI, P.N. (CJ)
BENCH:
BHAGWATI, P.N. (CJ)
MISRA RANGNATH
KHALID, V. (J)
OZA, G.L. (J)
DUTT, M.M. (J)

CITATION:
 1987 AIR  668		  1987 SCR  (1) 867
 1986 SCC  Supl.  683	  JT 1987 (1)	 40
 1986 SCALE  (2)1229


ACT:
    Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act, 1948, Section
88B(1)(b),  proviso  thereto--Whether  the  introduction  of
conditions (i) and (ii) thereunder offends the provisions of
Article 26 of the Constitution.



HEADNOTE:
    In	order  that the lands belonging to a  Trust  for  an
institution for public religious worship should be  entitled
to exemption from the operation of Sections 32 to 32R of the
Tenancy Act, 1948, two conditions namely (i) that the  Trust
must  be  registered or deemed to be  registered  under	 the
Bombay	Public	Trust Act, 1950; and (ii)  that	 the  entire
income of the lands belonging to a Trust for an	 institution
for  public religious worship must be appropriated  for	 the
purposes  of  such a Trust who added under  the	 proviso  to
section 36B(1)(b) of the Act. The challenge to the constitu-
tional validity of the same was negatived by the Bombay High
Court. Hence the appeals by special leave.
Dismissing the appeals, the Court,
    HELD:  Sub-section	1(b) of section 88B  of	 the  Bombay
Tenancy	 and  Agricultural Lands Act, 1948 does	 not  offend
against	 Article  26 of the Constitution by  reason  of	 the
introduction  of conditions (1) and (ii) in the	 proviso  to
that sub-section. [869G-H]
    Both  conditions (i) and (ii) do not in any way  detract
from the exemption granted under sub-section i(b) of section
88B  of the Act. Condition (i) merely introduces a  require-
ment  that  the	 Trust must be registered or  deemed  to  be
registered under the Bombay Public Trust Act, 1950 and	this
requirement is introduced in order to ensure that the  Trust
is really and truly a trust which falls within the  language
of subsection 1(b) of section 88B, namely, that it is  genu-
inely  a trust for an institution for public religious	wor-
ship. If the Trust is registered or deemed to be  registered
under  the Bombay Public Trust Act, 1950, that would  afford
incontrovertible proof of the fact that it is a trust for  a
charitable
868
or  religious  purpose.	 Condition (ii)	 requires  that	 the
entire	income	of  the lands belonging to a  Trust  for  an
institution for public religious worship must be appropriat-
ed  for the purposes of such Trust. If lands belonging to  a
trust for an institution for public religious worship are to
be eligible for exemption under sub-section t(b) of  section
88B,  it  would be quite legitimate for the  legislature  to
insist	that the entire income of such lands must be  appro-
priated	 for the purposes of such Trust. That  would  ensure
that  the  trust  is a genuine Trust  for  public  religious
worship	 and  is not merely a facade for carrying  out	some
other purposes. [869C-F]



JUDGMENT:
    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No.   11	 (N)
of 1969.
    From  the Judgment and Order dated 22/23.8. 1968 of	 the
Bombay High Court in S.C.A. No. 1418 of 1964.
V.N. Ganpule for the Appellant in C.A. No. 2211 of 1969.
    S.B. Bhasme, P.C. Kapur, V.N. Ganpule and S.K. Agnihotri
for the Appellants in C.A. No. 1191 of 1970.
Nemo for the Respondents in C.A. No. 2211 of 1969.
    Vinod Bobde, D.N. Mishra and Ms. Sunita for the Respond-
ents in C.A. No. 1191 of 1970.
Mrs. Urmila Sirur, for the Intervener.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
    BHAGWATI,  CJ. The only question which arises  in  these
appeals is whether sub-section 1(b) of section 88B is uncon-
stitutional and void as offending Article 26 of the  Consti-
tution.	 The constitutional validity of sub-section 1(b)  of
section	 88B  is assailed on the ground that  by  reason  of
condition  (i) in the proviso to this sub-section,  sections
32 to 32 R of the Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands	 Act
1948 (hereinafter referred to as the 'Tenancy Act') are made
applicable to lands which are the properties of a Trust	 for
an  institution for public religious worship, if such  Trust
is  not	 registered  or deemed to be  registered  under	 the
Bombay	Public	Trust  Act, 1950 and  the  applicability  of
sections 32 to 32R of the Tenancy Act to such lands  contra-
venes the right of the institution to own and acquire  move-
able and immovable property under Article 26 of the  Consti-
tution. The High
869
Court negatived this challenge urged on behalf of the  peti-
tioners.  We are also of the view that this  challenge	must
fail.  It is not necessary to go into any  detailed  reasons
for the purpose of holding that sub-section 1(b) of  section
88B  does not offend Article 26 of the Constitution  on	 ac-
count  of condition (i) in the proviso to that	sub-section.
This condition provides that in order that the lands belong-
ing  to	 a  Trust for an institution  for  public  religious
worship	 should be entitled to exemption from the  operation
of sections 32 to 32R of the Tenancy Act, the Trust must  be
registered  or	deemed	to be registered  under	 the  Bombay
Public	Trust Act, 1950. This condition does not in any	 way
militate  against  the exception which is made in  the	main
part  of sub-section 1(b) of section 88B in favour of  lands
belonging to a Trust for an institution for public religious
worship.  It merely introduces a requirement that the  Trust
must  be  registered or deemed to be  registered  under	 the
Bombay Public Trust Act, 1950 and this requirement is intro-
duced in order to ensure that the Trust is really and  truly
a trust which falls within the language of sub-section	1(b)
of section 88B, namely, that it is genuinely a trust for  an
institution  for public religious worship. If the  Trust  is
registered  or	deemed	to be registered  under	 the  Bombay
Public	Trust Act, 1950, that would afford  incontrovertible
proof  of  the fact that it is a trust for a  charitable  or
religious  purpose. This condition does not,  therefore,  in
any way detract from the exemption granted under sub-section
1(b) of section 88B.
    So	also, condition (ii) introduced in the proviso	does
not  detract from the exemption, since all that it  requires
is that the entire income of the lands belonging to a  trust
for  an	 institution for public religious  worship  must  be
appropriated  for the purposes of such Trust. If  lands	 be-
longing	 to a trust for an institution for public  religious
worship	 are to be eligible for exemption under	 sub-section
1(b)  of section 88B, it would be quite legitimate  for	 the
legislature  to insist that the entire income of such  lands
must  be appropriated for the purposes of such	Trust.	That
would  ensure that the trust is a genuine Trust	 for  public
religious  worship and is not merely a facade  for  carrying
out some other purpose.
     We are, therefore, of the view that sub-section 1(b) of
section	 88B does not offend against Article 26 of the	Con-
stitution  by reason of the introduction of  conditions	 (i)
and  (ii) in the proviso to that subsection.  These  appeals
must  fail on this short ground. They are  accordingly	dis-
missed but without any order as to costs.
S.R.					       Appeals	dis-
missed.
870




