

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Rural Litigation And ... vs State Of Uttar Pradesh & Ors. Etc on 18 December, 1986Equivalent citations: 1987 AIR  359, 1987 SCR  (1) 641
Author: P Bhagwati
Bench: Bhagwati, P.N. (Cj)
           PETITIONER:
RURAL LITIGATION AND ENTITLEMENTKENDRA & ORS. ETC.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH & ORS. ETC.

DATE OF JUDGMENT18/12/1986

BENCH:
BHAGWATI, P.N. (CJ)
BENCH:
BHAGWATI, P.N. (CJ)
MISRA RANGNATH

CITATION:
 1987 AIR  359		  1987 SCR  (1) 641
 1986 SCC  Supl.  517	  JT 1986  1119
 1986 SCALE  (2)1083
 CITATOR INFO :
 RF	    1987 SC2426	 (5)
 R	    1988 SC2187	 (14)


ACT:
Constitution of India, 1950:--
    Article		   51A(g)--Environment--Preservation
of--Ecological balance keeping	unaffected--Task--Government
as also every citizen undertake.
Mineral	 Regulations  Act, 1948/Minerals  Concession  Rules,
1949.
    Limestone--Quarrying of--Grant of mining  leases--Depos-
its not to be exploited at cost of ecology and environmental
consideration.



HEADNOTE:
    A letter received from the Rural Litigation and Entitle-
ment  Kendra  Dehradun was treated as a	 Writ  Petition	 and
notices	 issued.  The main allegations	therein	 related  to
unauthorised and illegal mining operations carried on in the
Mussoorie Hills and the area around adversely affecting	 the
ecology	 of the area and leading to  environmental  disturb-
ances. In July, 1983 this Court directed all fresh quarrying
to be stopped.
    On 11.8.1983 this Court appointed Bhargav Committee	 for
inspecting all the mines except those belonging to the State
of  Uttar  Pradesh and the Union of  India  for	 determining
whether the safety standards laid down in the Mines Act 1952
and  the Mines Rules were being observed or not and  whether
there  was  any danger of landslides or was  any  hazard  to
individuals, cattle or agricultural lands by carrying on  of
mining operations. Blasting operations in the area were also
directed  to be stopped. On the basis of the main report  of
the  said Committee this Court on August 24, 1983  permitted
removal of limestone already quarried. The Committee direct-
ed  closure  of some of the mines and reported	the  defects
appearing in other mines and called upon the mine owners  to
carry out rectifications.
    The Bhargav Committee classified the mines in A, B and C
groups.	 So far as the mines in Group C were concerned,	 the
Committee  recommended that they should he closed  down.  As
regards the mines in Group A, the Committee opined that	 the
quarrying  could he carried on without any environmental  or
ecological hazard. The Committee also
642
recommended closure of B Group mines permanently. The  Union
Government  had also appointed a Working Group on mining  of
limestone quarries in Dehradun and Mussoorie area some	time
in.  1983  which  was also headed by Shri  Bhargav  who	 was
heading	 the Committee appointed by this Court. The  Working
Group  submitted  its  report in September,  1983.  After  a
comparative  analysis  of the two reports, the	Court  found
that the Working Group had taken these very mines for  their
study and had divided the mines into two categories, namely,
Class  I  and Class II. All the mines  then  categorised  as
Class I were now included by the Bhargav Committee in  Group
A  and the remaining mines now classified as Group B  and  C
were in Class II.
    This Court had also appointed an Expert Committee headed
by Professor Valdia to consider the problems of ecology	 and
environment with reference to mining. Professor Valdia	gave
a  separate report while the other two members gave a  joint
report. In its order of March 12, 1985, this Court  observed
that it does not propose to rely on the report of  Professor
Valdia	and  it would not be safe to direct  continuance  or
discontinuance of mining operations in limestone quarries on
the basis of Main Boundary Thrust. In 12th March, 1985 order
this  Court directed that the limestone quarries located  in
Sahasradhara Block and placed in Category Il by the  Working
Group  should  be closed down, that the	 limestone  quarries
placed in Category II by the Working Group other than  those
which are placed in Category B and C by the Bhargav  Commit-
tee  should  also  be closed down save and  except  for	 the
limestone quarries covered by the mining leases numbers	 31,
36  and 37 for which the same direction should be  given  as
would  be given in regard to the limestone quarries  classi-
fied as Category B in the Bhargav Committee Report, and that
if  there  are any subsisting leases in respect	 of  any  of
these limestone quarries they will forthwith come to an	 end
and if any suits or writ petitions for continuance expire on
unexpired leases in respect of any of these limestone  quar-
ries are pending, they too will stand dismissed.
    This Court also directed closing down of the mines in  A
Category located within the municipal limits of Mussoorie.
    In	regard to B Class quarries of the Bhargav  Committee
Report	which featured in Category II of the  Working  Group
Report, as also of the A Category quarries within the munic-
ipal  limits, this Court set up a Committee headed  by	Shri
Bandopadhyay, then Secretary in the Ministry of Rural Devel-
opment and called upon the mine owners to submit a full	 and
detailed scheme to that Committee for its examination
643
and report to the Court about the same. It was directed that
until  further	orders from this Court on the basis  of	 the
Bandopadhyay  Committee	 Report	 these mines  shall  not  be
worked. Bandopadhyay Committee submitted its report  reject-
ing the schemes put forward by various lessees of the  mines
which have been closed down.
    On	20th November, 1986 this Court granted time  to	 the
erstwhile lessees of mines to file objections to  Bandopadh-
yay Committee Report within six weeks and reply, if any,  to
be filed by the petitioners and the State within four  weeks
thereafter.  The  petitions were to come up for	 hearing  in
February, 1987.
    By order dated March 12, 1985 the Court made a  detailed
order  containing various directions reported in  [(1985)  3
SCR 169] and the reasons therefor were to follow later.
    Hon'ble  Mr. Justice A.N. Sen one of the members of	 the
Bench who heard these petitions before his retirement deliv-
ered  judgment on 30th September 1985 expressing  his  views
that  it is not necessary to give any further  reasons	than
those  which  are already stated in the order made  on	12th
March,	1985 because the broad reasons have been  adequately
set out in the order and it would be an unnecessary exercise
to elaborate them.
Giving the reasons the Court,
    HELD:  1. On a perusal of order dated 12th	March,	1985
the  other members of the Bench are inclined to	 agree	with
the view taken by Hon'ble Mr. Justice A.N. Sen that the said
order  covered almost all the relevant aspects	and  touched
upon every issue germane to the matter. [646E]
    2.	The  question whether the schemes submitted  by	 the
mine  lessees  to Bandopadhyay Committee have  been  rightly
rejected  or not and whether under those schemes,  the	mine
lessees can be allowed to carry on mining operations without
in  any	 way adversely affecting environment  or  ecological
balance or causing hazard to individuals, cattle or agricul-
tural lands still remain to be considered and would have  to
be  decided in the light of the view taken by this Court  in
the  order dated 12th March, 1985 and the instant  judgment.
[650C-E]
    3.	Preservation  of  the environment  and	keeping	 the
ecological  balance  unaffected	 is a task  which  not	only
Governments  but also every citizen must undertake. It is  a
social obligation and every Indian citizen
644
is reminded that it is his fundamental duty as enshrined  in
Article 51 A(g) of the Constitution. [653D-E]
    4.	Consciousness  for environmental  protection  is  of
recent origin. Scientific development have made it  possible
and  convenient	 for man to approach the  places  which	 are
beyond	his ken. The consequences of such interference	with
ecology	 and  environment  have now  come  to  be  realised.
[652F-H]
    5.	Government both at the Centre and in the  State-must
realize	 and  remain cognizent of the fact  that  the  stake
involved  in the matter is large and far reaching. The	evil
consequences  would last long. Once that unwanted  situation
sets in, amends or repairs would not be possible. The green-
ery  of India may perish and the Thar desert may expand	 its
limits. [652 E-F]
    6.	It has been commended earlier to the State of  Uttar
Pradesh	 as  also to the Union of India	 that  afforestation
activity  may  be carried out in the whole  valley  and	 the
hills. Such activity has been undertaken. This Court is	 not
oblivious of the fact that the natural resources have to  be
tapped for the purposes of social development but one cannot
forget of the same time that tapping of resources have to be
done  with requisite attention and care so that ecology	 and
environment  may not be affected in any serious	 way;  there
may  not be any depletion of water resources and  long	term
planning must be undertaken to keep up the national  wealth.
[653B-C]
    7.	It is for the Government and the Nation-and not	 for
the Court--to decide whether the deposits should be exploit-
ed  at the cost of ecology and environmental  considerations
or the industrial requirement should be otherwise satisfied.
It  may be perhaps possible to exercise greater control	 and
vigil over the operation and strike a balance between  pres-
ervation  and utilisation and that would indeed be a  matter
for an expert body to examine and on the basis of  appropri-
ate  advice,  Government should take a policy  decision	 and
firmly implement the same. [652D-E]
    8.	In the instant case, the limestone quarries  in	 the
area are estimated to satisfy roughly three per cent of	 the
country's demand. At the present rate of mining, the  depos-
its  are likely to last some 50 years. Digging of  limestone
and allowing the waste to roll down or carried down by	rain
water to the lower levels has affected the villages as	also
the agricultural lands located below the hills. For removing
the
645
limestones quarried from the mines, roads have been laid and
for that purpose the hills have been interfered with;  traf-
fic  hazard  for  the  local  population  both	animals	 and
men--has increased. [652B]
    9.	In  1949 the Minerals Concession Rules made  by	 the
Central Government under the Minerals Regulations Act,	1948
authorised  grant  of mining leases and	 several  applicants
came  forward for quarrying of high grade  limestone.  Until
1962,  extraction  of limestone was permitted  on  temporary
permits by the State Govt. of Uttar Pradesh. [651 F-G]



JUDGMENT:
ORIGINAL JURISDICTION
WRIT PETITION NO. 8209 & 8821 of 1983.
(Under Article 32 of the Constitution of India)
    M.A.   Krishnamoorthy,  Pramod Dayal, Rishi	 Kesh,	R.B.
Mehrotra,  M.G. Ramachandran, C.M. Nayyar,  M.	Karanjawala,
S.A. Sayed, Sushil Kumar Jain, S. Dikshit, P.P. Juneja, P.K.
Jain,  K.N.  Bhatt, D.N. Misra, I. Makwana,  A.	 Subba	Rao,
Harjinder  Singh, B.P. Singh, Parijat Sinha, C.P. Lal,	Shri
Narain, S.K. Gupta, K.R. Nambiar, S.S. Khanduja, K.K.  Jain,
C.M.  Nargolkar,  Kapil Sibal, R. Ramachandran and  Miss  A.
Subhashini  for	 the Appearing Parties and  Devi  Ditta	 Mal
Petitioner in person.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by,
    RANGANATH  MISRA,  J. On March 12, 1985,  after  hearing
counsel and parties appearing in person at great length this
Court made a detailed order wherein it was said;
	      "This  case  has been argued at  great  length
	      before  us not only because a large number  of
	      lessees of limestone quarries are involved and
	      each of them has painstakingly and exhaustive-
	      ly  canvassed  his factual as  well  as  legal
	      points  of view but also because this  is	 the
	      first case of its kind in the country  involv-
	      ing issues relating to environment and ecolog-
	      ical  balance  and the questions	arising	 for
	      consideration are of grave moment and signifi-
	      cance  not only to the people residing in	 the
	      Mussoorie	 Hill  range  forming  part  of	 the
	      Himalayas	 but also in their  implications  to
	      the welfare of the generality of people living
	      in the country. It brings into sharp focus the
	      conflict between development and	conservation
	      and serves to emphasise the need for reconcil-
	      ing  the	two in the larger  interest  of	 the
	      country. But since
	      646
	      having  regard  to  the  voluminous   material
	      placed  before  us and  the  momentous  issues
	      raised for decision, it is not possible for us
	      to prepare a full and detailed judgment  imme-
	      diately  and at the same time, on	 account  of
	      interim  order made by us,  mining  operations
	      carried out through blasting have been stopped
	      and  the	ends  of justice  require  that	 the
	      lessees  of  limestone quarries  should  know,
	      without  any  unnecessary delay, as  to  where
	      they stand in regard to their limestone  quar-
	      ries, we propose to pass our order on the writ
	      petitions.  The reasons for the order will  be
	      set out in the judgment to follow later."
    In the meantime, one of us our learned Brother Sen,	 J.,
has  retired from the Court. Before that event happened,  on
30th September, 1985, he delivered a judgment expressing his
views on the matter. He indicated:
	      "I  do  not  think it necessary  to  give	 any
	      further  reasons than those which are  already
	      stated in the order made by us on 12th  March,
	      1985. Speaking personally for myself, I  think
	      that  the broad reasons have  been  adequately
	      set out in the order and it would be an unnec-
	      essary exercise to elaborate them."
On  a perusal of our order of the 12th March, 1985,  we	 are
inclined  to  agree with his view that	the  detailed  order
covered	 almost	 all the relevant aspects and  touched	upon
every issue germane to the matter.
    As	this  was the first case of its type with  wide	 and
serious	 ramifications, we would like. to give a  brief	 ac-
count of the manner in which the proceedings commenced, were
carried on and are to be concluded.
    By	an  order  dated 14.7.1983, this  Court	 directed  a
letter	received from the Rural Litigation  and	 Entitlement
Kendra,	 Dehra	Dun dated 2.7.1983 along  with	accompanying
affidavits  to	be  treated as a writ  petition	 and  issued
notice	to the State of Uttar Pradesh and the  Collector  of
Dehra  Dun. The main allegation therein related to  unautho-
rised and illegal mining operations carried on in the  Muss-
oorie  Hills  and the area around  adversely  affecting	 the
ecology'  of the area and leading to environmental  disturb-
ances.	Later  on, another application was  directed  to  be
tagged on and both the applications were dealt with  togeth-
er.  Several parties, mainly, mining lessees numbering	more
than 100, got impleaded either at the instance of the  peti-
tioners	 or on their own seeking. By a later order  made  in
the month of July 1983,
647
this  Court directed all fresh quarrying to be	stopped	 and
called	upon the District Magistrate and the  Superintendent
of  Police  of Dehra Dun District to strictly  enforce	that
order.
    On 11.8.1983, after heating the counsel for parties then
appearing, this Court appointed a Committee for the  purpose
of  inspecting all the mines other than those  belonging  to
the  State of Uttar Pradesh and the Union of India,  with  a
view  to determining whether the safety standards laid	down
in the Mines Act, 1952, and the Mines Rules made  thereunder
were being observed or not and whether there was any  danger
of landslides on account of the quarrying operations partic-
ularly	during the monsoon in any of the mines and if  there
was any other hazard to individuals, cattle or	agricultural
lands  by  reason of the carrying on of	 mining	 operations.
Blasting  operations  in the area were also directed  to  be
stopped.  This	Committee came to be known as  the  Bhargava
Committee  and	its members were authorised to	inspect	 the
mines  and give suitable directions. The Committee made	 its
main  report on the basis whereof this Court on	 August	 24,
1983  permitted removal of limestone already  quarried.	 The
Committee directed closure of some of the mines and reported
the defects appearing in the other mines and called upon the
mine owners to carry out rectifications.
    The Bhargava Committee classified the mines in the	area
into  three groups being A, B and C. So far as the mines  in
Group  (C)  were concerned, the Committee was  of  the	view
that.they  were	 not suitable for  continuance	and  should,
therefore, be closed down. So far as the question related to
the  mines in Group A the Committee was of the opinion	that
the quarrying could be carried on without any  environmental
or  ecological hazard. In regard to the B group	 mines,	 the
Bhargava Committee opined that those may not be closed	down
permanently though it did notice the adverse impact of their
mining	activities. In its order of 12th March,	 1985,	this
Court  took note of the fact that the Union  Government	 had
appointed a Working Group on mining of limestone quarries in
Dehra  Dun  and	 Mussoorie area some time in  1983  and	 the
Working	 Group	was  also headed by  Shri  Bhargava  who-was
heading	 the  Committee appointed by this Court.  The  other
members	 of the Working Group were experts in the field	 and
the  Working  Group had submitted the  report  in  September
1983.  A  comparative  analysis was made by  this  Court  in
regard	to the mines by referring to both the  reports.	 The
Court  found  that the Working Group had  taken	 these	very
mines  for  their study and had divided the mines  into	 two
categories--namely, Class I and Class II. It transpires
648
that  all  the mines then categorised as Class	I  were	 now
included  by the Bhargava Committee in Group A and  the	 re-
maining mines now classified as Group B and C by the Bharga-
va Committee were in Class II.
    This  Court	 also, appointed an  Expert  Committee	with
Professor  Valdia  and two Members mainly  to  consider	 the
problems  of ecology and environment with reference to	min-
ing. Professor Valdia gave a separate report while the other
two  members gave a joint report. Dealing with the  separate
report	furnished by Professor Valdia, this Court in its  of
March 12, 1985 stated:
	      We  may-observe  straightaway that we  do	 not
	      propose  to  rely on the report  of  Professor
	      Valdia  who  was	one of the  Members  of	 the
	      Expert Committee appointed by our order  dated
	      2.9.1983	as modified by the order dated	23rd
	      October  1, 1983 This. Committee consisted  of
	      Professor	 Valdia,  Shri Hukum Singh and	Shri
	      D.N. Kaul and it was appointed to enquire	 and
	      investigate  into the question of	 disturbance
	      of  ecology and pollution and  affectation  of
	      air, water and environment by reason of  quar-
	      rying operations or working  of stone crushers
	      or limestone kilns. Shri Hukum Singh submitted
	      a	 joint report in regard to  various  aspects
	      while  Professor Valdia submitted	 a  separate
	      report. Professor Valdia's report was confined
	      shortly  to  the	geological  aspect  and	 his
	      report he placed considerable reliance on	 the
	      Main  Boundary Thrust (shortly referred to  as
	      M.B.T)  and  he took the view  that  limestone
	      quarries	which  were  dangerously  close	  to
	      M.B.T.  should  be closed down,  because	they
	      were in the sensitive and vulnerable belt.  We
	      shall  examine this report in detail  when  we
	      give our reasons but we may straightaway point
	      out  that	 w do not think it  safe  to  direct
	      continuance or discontinuance of mining opera-
	      tions-in	limestone quarries on the  basis  of
	      M.B.T."
At  the further. hearings after the said order, parties	 did
not address arguments with reference to M.B.T. and we are of
the  view that this topic need not be dealt  with by us:  In
12th  March 1985 order we directed that the limestone  quar-
ries  located  in Sahasradhara Block and II by	the  Working
Group should be closed down.
	      also direct, agreeing with the Report made by
	      649
	      the Working Group that the limestone  quarries
	      placed  in  Category II by the  Working  Group
	      other  than those which are placed in  Catego-
	      ries B and C by the Bhargava Committee  should
	      also not be allowed to be operated and  should
	      be  closed down save and except for the  lime-
	      stone  quarries covered by the  mining  leases
	      numbers  31,36 and 37 for which we  will	give
	      the  same	 direction as we are giving  in	 the
	      succeeding  paragraphs in regard to the  lime-
	      stone quarries classified as Category B in the
	      Bhargava	Committee Report. If there  are	 any
	      subsisting  leases in respect of any of  these
	      limestone quarries they will forthwith come to
	      an end and if any suits or writ petitions	 for
	      continuance  expire  or  unexpired  leases  in
	      respect of any of these limestone quarries are
	      pending, they too will stand dismissed."
    This  Court	 directed  closing down of the	mines  in  A
Category located within the municipal limits of Mussoorie.
    In regard to B Class quarries of the Bhargava  Committee
Report	which featured in Category II of the  Working  Group
Report, as also of the A Category quarries within the munic-
ipal limits, we set up a Committee under the chairmanship of
Shri  D.  Bandyopadhyay, then Secretary in the	Ministry  of
Rural Development and called 'upon the mine owners to submit
a  full	 and detailed scheme to that Committee	which  would
examine	 the said scheme keeping in view the  provisions  of
the law as also the expediency of allowing mining operations
in the area and report to the Court about the same. We	have
directed  that until further orders from this Court  on	 the
basis of Bandopadhyay Committee report these mines shall not
be  worked.  It	 may be pointed out  that  the	Bandopadhyay
Committee has submitted its report rejecting the schemes put
forward	 by  various lessees of the mines  which  have	been
Closed	down  and  on 20th November, 1986,  this  Court	 has
directed:
	      "We  are informed that Bandopadhyay  Committee
	      has   submitted  its  report  rejecting	the.
	      schemes  put  forward  by	 various   erstwhile
	      lessees  of the mines which have	been  closed
	      down now. This Report was made as far back as'
	      in  April 1986 and those who wanted  to  raise
	      objections,  ought  to have done so  within  a
	      reasonable time after the report was submitted
	      and those who have failed to do so, we  cannot
	      shut  them out and prevent them  from  raising
	      their  objections; and in any event  delay  in
	      filing cannot prejudice public interest  since
	      stone quarrying had already closed
	      650
	      down.  We would, therefore, grant time to	 the
	      erstwhile lessees of mines, who wish to  raise
	      objections,  to file their  objections  within
	      six  weeks from to-day and reply, if  any,  to
	      those objections may be filed on behalf of the
	      petitioners  and	the State of  Uttar  Pradesh
	      within four weeks thereafter.
			The old record of the case may	also
	      be kept in Court at the time of the hearing of
	      this Writ Petition.
			Writ  Petition	will  come  up	 for
	      hearing on 3rd Tuesday in February 1987 before
	      a Bench of which Hon'ble Mr. Justice Ranganath
	      Misra is a member."
    From the aforesaid order it is clear that in view of the
directions given by this Court the question still remains to
be  considered	whether the schemes submitted  by  the	mine
lessees to the Bandopadhyaya Committee under our Order dated
12th March 1985 have been rightly rejected or not and wheth-
er  under those schemes, the mine lessees can be allowed  to
carry  on  mining operations without in	 any  way  adversely
affecting  environment	or  ecological	balance	 or  causing
hazard	to individuals, cattle and agricultural lands.	This
question  would, of course, have to be decided in the  light
of  the view taken by us in our Order dated 12th March	1985
and the present judgment.
    The Himalayan range on the Northern Boundary of India is
the most recent mountain range and yet it is the tallest. It
has  formed the Northern boundary of the country  and  until
recent	times  provided	 an impregnable	 protection  to	 the
Indian	sub-continent  from  the  Northern  direction.	This
mountain range has been responsible to regulate the monsoons
and consequently the rainfall in the Indo-gangetic belt. The
Himalayas  are the source for perennial rivers--the  Ganges,
Yamuna	and  Brahmputra as also	 several  other	 tributaries
which have joined these main rivers. For thousands of  years
nature	has displaced its splendour through the	 lush  green
trees, innumerable springs and beautiful flowers. The  Hima-
layas has been the store house of herbs, shrubs and  plants.
Deep  forests  on the lower hills have	helped	to  generate
congenial conditions for good rain.
    The Doon Valley has been an exquisite region bounded  by
the  Himalayan	and the Shivalik ranges and  the  Ganga	 and
Yamuna	rivers. The perennial water streams and the  fertile
soil  have contributed not only to the growth of dense	lush
green forests but have helped the yield
651
of  basmati rice and leeches. Mussoorie, known as the  queen
of  Indian  hill stations situated at a height of  5000	 ft.
above  sea  level and Dehra Doon located below	the  heights
have  turned out to be important places of  tourist  attrac-
tion, centres of education, research and defence complex.
    At	present the Valley is in danger because of  erratic,
irrational  and	 uncontrolled quarrying	 of  limestone.	 The
landscape has been stripped bare of its verdant cover. Green
cover  today  is about 10 per cent of the  area	 while	from
decades ago it was almost 70 per cent.
    The limestone belt has acted as the aquifer--to hold and
release water perennially. All the important  streams--Song,
Baldi,	Rispana,  Kairuli and Bhitarli originate  from	this
area. Reckless mining, careless disposal of the	 mine-debris
and  random blasting operations have disturbed	the  natural
water  system and the supply of water both for drinking	 and
irrigation  has substantially gone down: There is a  growing
apprehension that if mining is carried on in this process, a
stage  will come when there would be dearth of water in	 the
entire belt.
    About a hundred years back around the middle of the last
century,  Britishers penetrated into the area and  developed
Mussoorie as a Hill Resort. The existence of huge  limestone
deposits  came	to be discovered by the	 beginning  of	this
century.  Quarrying operations on small scale began.  Direct
human  interference  in limestone quarrying  seems  to	have
begun in 1900. Around 1904 all the quarries were declared as
property  of the Government and as appears from	 the  Bando-
padhyay	 Report,  in the year 1911 there existed  only	four
limestone  quarries.  It had been working in the  Dehra	 Dun
area. Around 1947, limestone quarrying took a new turn and a
number	of  persons who had migrated from  Pakistan  started
working on limestone deposits by quarrying in private lands.
In  1949, the Minerals Concession Rules made by the  Central
Government under the Minerals Regulations Act, 1948,  autho-
rised  grant  of mining leases and several  applicants	came
forward	 for quarrying of high grade limestone. Until  1962,
extraction  of limestone was permitted on temporary  permits
by the State Government of Uttar Pradesh.
    In	these proceedings we came across 105  mining  leases
and these, as the various reports have indicated, had direct
environmental impact on the area. It is said that the  lime-
stone  deposits in this area are of high grade	having	upto
99.8  calcium  carbonate. Mining operations in	these  areas
have led to cutting down of the forest. Digging of
652
limestone  and	allowing the waste to roll down	 or  carried
down  by  rain water to the lower levels  has  affected	 the
villages  as also the agricultural lands located  below	 the
hills.	The  naturally	formed streams	have  been  blocked.
Blasting  has  disturbed the natural quiet, has	 shaken	 the
soil, loosened the rocky structures and disturbed the entire
ecology	 of the area. For removing the	limestones  quarried
from  the mines, roads have been laid and for  that  purpose
the hills have been interfered with; traffic hazard for	 the
local population--both animals and men--has increased.
    The	 limestone  quarries in this area are  estimated  to
satisfy	 roughly three per cent of the country's demand	 for
such  raw material and we were told during the heating	that
the  Tata Iron and Steel Company is the largest consumer  of
this limestone for manufacturer of a special kind of  steel.
At  the present rate of mining, the deposits are  likely  to
last  some  50	years.	It is for  the	Government  and	 the
Nation-and not for the Court--to decide whether the deposits
should be exploited as the cost of ecology and environmental
considerations	or  the	 industrial  requirement  should  be
otherwise satisfied. It may be perhaps possible to  exercise
greater	 control and vigil over the operation and  strike  a
balance	 between  preservation and  utilisation	 that  would
indeed be a matter for an expert body to examine and on	 the
basis of appropriate advice, Government should take a policy
decision and firmly implement the same.
    Governments--both  at the Centre and in the	 State--must
realize	 and  remain cognizant of the fact  that  the  stake
involved  in the matter is large and far-reaching. The	evil
consequences  would last long. Once that unwanted  situation
sets in, amends or repairs would not be possible. The green-
ery of India, as some doubt, may perish and the Thar  desert
may expand its limits.
    Consciousness for environmental protection is of  recent
origin.	 The United Nations Conference on World	 Environment
held  in  Stockholm in June 1972 and  the  follow-up  action
thereafter  is	spreading the awareness. Over  thousands  of
years  men had been successfully exploiting  the  ecological
system for his sustenance but with the growth of  population
the demand for land has increased and forest growth has been
and  is being cut down and man has started encroaching	upon
Nature and its assets. Scientific developments have made  it
possible and convenient for man to approach the places which
were  hitherto	beyond	his ken. The  consequences  of	such
interference  with ecology and environment have now came  to
be realised. It is necessary that the
653
Himalayas and the forest growth on the mountain range should
be  left uninterfered with so that there may  be  sufficient
quantity  of  rain. The top soil may  be  preserved  without
being eroded and the natural setting of the area may  remain
intact.	 We  had  commended earlier to the  State  of  Uttar
Pradesh	 as  also to the Union of India	 that  afforestation
activity  may  be carried out in the whole  valley  and	 the
hills. We have been told that such activity has been  under-
taken.	We  are not oblivious of the fact that	natural	 re-
sources	 have  got to be tapped for the purposes  of  social
development  but  one cannot forget at the  same  time	that
tapping	 of resources have to be done with requisite  atten-
tion  and  care so that ecology and environment may  not  be
affected in any serious' way; there may not be any depletion
of water resources and long-term planning must be undertaken
to  keep up the national wealth. It has always to be  remem-
bered that these are permanent assets of mankind and are not
intended to be exhausted in one generation.
    We	must place on record our appreciation of  the  steps
taken  by the Rural Litigation and Entitlement	Kendra.	 But
for  this move, all that has happened perhaps may  not	have
come.  Preservation of the environment and keeping the	eco-
logical balance unaffected is a task which not only  Govern-
ments but also every citizen must undertake. It is a  social
obligation and let us remind every Indian citizen that it is
his fundamental duty as enshrined in Article 51 A(g) of	 the
Constitution.
    We are of the view that the Kendra should be entitled to
the  costs  of this proceeding. We assess the  same  at	 Rs.
10.000 and direct the State of Uttar Pradesh to pay the same
either directly or through Court within one month.
A.P.J.
654
