

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
R.S Dass Etc. Etc vs Union Of 'India & Ors on 11 December, 1986Equivalent citations: 1987 AIR  593, 1987 SCR  (1) 527
Author: K Singh
Bench: Singh, K.N. (J)
           PETITIONER:
R.S DASS ETC. ETC.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
UNION OF 'INDIA & ORS.,

DATE OF JUDGMENT11/12/1986

BENCH:
SINGH, K.N. (J)
BENCH:
SINGH, K.N. (J)
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)

CITATION:
 1987 AIR  593		  1987 SCR  (1) 527
 1986 SCC  Supl.  617	  JT 1986  1043
 1986 SCALE  (2)1012
 CITATOR INFO :
 F	    1988 SC1069	 (7)
 R	    1990 SC1402	 (26)
 R	    1992 SC1806	 (7)


ACT:
    Constitution of India,' 1950--Arts. 14 and 16-Members of
    State  'Civil  Service	(Executive)--Promotion	 to   Indian
    Administrative Service--Selection--Merit sole basis--Senior-
    ity--Whether confers any legal right on a Government servant
    for promotion-- Whether such right protected by Arts. 14 and
    16--Eligible  officers considered on merit in  an  objective
    manner--Non-selection of seniors--Whether amounts to  super-
    session--Whether  Selection  Committee	required  to  record
    reasons for non-selection of seniors-- Whether	non--record-
    ing of reasons under amended Regulation 5(4) and (5) of	 IAS
    (Appointment  by  Promotion) Regulations 1955  violative  of
    Arts. 14 and 16.
        Natural Justice--Civil Service--Promotion--Selection  on
    Merit  alone--Eligible	officers considered on merit  in  an
    objective  manner-Seniors  not	selected--Seniority--Whether
    confers	 any  legal right on a	Government  Servant--Whether
    opportunity  required to be given to the superseded  officer
    for   making  representation--Rules  of	  natural   justice-
    Application of--Depends upon the setting and the  background
    of  statutory provisions, nature of the right  affected	 and
    the consequences which may entail.
        Civil  Service--Indian Administrative Service  (Appoint-
    ment by Promotion) Regulation, 1955 Regulations 3, 5(4), (5)
    &  (7), 6 and 8 and Indian Administrative Service  (Recruit-
    ment) Rules, 1954--Rules 4 and 8(i)--Members of Punjab State
    Civil Service (Executive)Promotion 40 Indian  Administrative
    Service--Selection--Merit	  alone	       to	  be
    considered--Seniority--Whether confers any legal right on  a
    Government  Servant for Promotion--Whether such	 right	pro-
    tected	by Arts. 14 and 16--Eligible officers t0 be  consid-
    ered	in    an    objective	 manner--Non-selection	  of
    seniors--Whether  amounts to supersession-Whether  Selection
    Committee/State	 Government  required to  give	reasons	 for
    non-selection  of  seniors--Non-recording  of  reasons	 for
    supersession--Select  List--Validity  of--Whether  Promotion
    Regulations 3, 5 and 7 ultra vires Recruitment Rule 8(1).
    Services--Categorisation of eligible officers as  'Outstand-
    ing',
    528
    'Very	Good',	 'Good'	  and  'Unfit'	 for   purposes	  of
    Promotion--Basis  of categorisation should be objective	 and
    not merely subjective evaluation- Service record-- Character
    roll entries-- Importance of.
        Administrative action--Power--Vested in a high  authori-
    ty-Whether  sufficient safeguard against  arbitrariness	 and
    misuse	of power--Presumption--Whether power would be  exer-
    cised  reasonably-Judicial review--Scope, of Delay  in	for-
    warding	 comments  to  Public Service  Commission  by  State
    Government--Whether constitutes mala fides.
    
    

HELD:

    The Central Government under s.3 of the All India  Serv-
ices  Act,  1951 framed Indian Administrative  Service	(Re-
cruitment)  Rules, 1954. According to Rule 4 recruitment  to
the  Indian  Administrative Service is made by:	 (i)  direct
recruitment through competitive examination; (ii)  promotion
of  substantive members of the State Civil  Service  (Execu-
tive) and (iii) selection from amongst persons holding posts
in  substantive capacity in connection with the	 affairs  of
the  State, who may not be members of the State Civil  Serv-
ice.  Under  Rule  8(1) the Central  Government	 framed	 the
Indian	Administrative	Service (Appointment  by  Promotion)
Regulations,  1955 laying down procedure for  selection	 for
appointment  to the service by promotion. Regulation 3	pro-
vides  for the Constitution of a Selection Committee.  Regu-
lation 5 provides that the Committee shall prepare the	list
of  such members of the State Civil Service  found  suitable
for promotion to the service on an over all relative assess-
ments  of  the service. The State Government  shall  forward
this list to the Union Public Service Commission along	with
the  records  of the selected members as well  as  of  those
proposed to be superseded together with the observations  of
the State Government on the recommendation of the Committee'
for consideration of the Union Public Service Commission and
the  list  so  approved shall form the Select  List  of	 the
members of State Civil Service and shall be in force until a
fresh list is prepared and approved for the subsequent year.
Regulation 8 lays down that the appointment shall be made by
the  Central Government on the recommendations of the  State
Government in the order in which the names of members of the
State Civil Service appear in the Select List. In the  proc-
ess  of	 preparing the Select List if the  seniors  are	 not
found  suitable for promotion and their names in the  Select
List  are  not included and, if junior	officers  are  found
suitable for the inclusion of the names in the Select  List,
the  seniors stand superseded, as the selection is  made  on
merit and not on the basis of seniority.
Three members of the Punjab State Civil Service	 (Executive)
filed
529
separate  petitions under Art. 226 challenging the  validity
of the Select List of 1978 for promotion to the LA.S. alleg-
ing: (i) that they were eligible for promotion to the Indian
Administrative Service, but their names were not included in
the Select List while names of officers Junior to them	were
included,  thereby superseding them in an  arbitrary  manner
without	 recording  any	 reasons; (ii)	that  the  mandatory
provisions  of	Regulation 6 of	 the  Indian  Administrative
Service	 (Appointment by Promotion) Regulations,  1955	were
violated  as the service records of eligible State  Officers
including  the	petitioners had not been  forwarded  to	 the
Union  Public Service Commission; (iii) that amendment	made
in  Regulation 5 deleting the provision which required	rea-
sons to be recorded for the supersession of a State Officer,
was  arbitrary	and violative of Article 14; (iv)  that	 the
Regulations  were  ultra vires being inconsistent  with	 the
Indian Administrative Service (Recruitment) Rules, 1954; (v)
that  one officer had earned adverse remarks and yet he	 was
selected;  (vi)	 that  important material  relating  to	 the
petitioners'  service including certificate and	 letters  of
recommendations were not considered by the Selection Commit-
tee.
    A Division Bench of the High Court by a Common Judgement
in Baldev Kapoor's case [(1980) 2 SLR 309] dismissed all the
petitions holding that the Select List prepared for the year
1978  did  not suffer from any legal infirmity.	 During	 the
pendency  of these petitions Select List for the  year	1979
was also prepared and the name of one of the petitioners was
not included in that list also. Another writ petition  chal-
lenging that Select List was also filed on the same  grounds
and dismissed.
    In	similar Writ Petitions, the Full Bench of  the	High
Court  to whom the matter was referred for consideration  on
the  question  as  to whether the Select List  of  1978	 was
vitiated for non-compliance of Regulation 6(iii) inasmuch as
reasons	 for supersession of senior officers were  not	for-
warded	to  the Commission, held that the  decision  of	 the
Supreme	 Court in Chothia's case [1978) 3 SCR 652]  did	 not
affect	the  position and the Division Bench's	decision  in
Baldev Kapoor's case (supra) correctly laid down the law.
    Appeals were filed in this Court and during their  pend-
ency  15 other officers filed petitions under Art. 32  chal-
lenging the validity of Select Lists for the years 1979	 and
1980. Some other officers filed similar petitions  challeng-
ing the validity of Select Lists prepared for the year 1983.
Select	Lists for the years 1978, 1979, 1980 and  1983	were
challenged almost on similar grounds.
530
    In	the present appeals and petitions, on behalf of	 the
appellants  and petitioners it was contended: (1)  that	 the
Select	Lists of 1978, 1979, 1980 and 1983 were vitiated  as
the Selection Committee did not record any reasons in super-
seding	the  appellants/petitioners  while  excluding  their
names  and  including the names of junior  officers  in	 the
Select Lists; (2) that the amendment of the Regulation	5(7)
was violative of Articles 14 and 16 as it conferred unguided
power  on the Selection Committee to supersede senior  offi-
cers;  (3) that the Select List prepared for the  year	1978
was  vitiated  for non-compliance of  Regulation  6(iii)  as
reasons recorded by the Selection Commitee were not forward-
ed  by	the State Government to the  Commission	 along	with
record of officers proposed to be superseded; (4) that	even
if  under  the Regulations no reasons were necessary  to  be
recorded,  principles of Natural Justice and fair  play	 re-
quired. that reasons should have been recorded; (5) that the
Select	Lists  prepared	 for the years 1978  and  1979	were
vitiated  on account of unauthorised participation  of	Shri
LC.  Puri as a Member of the Selection Committee;  (6)	that
the  Regulation	 3 and 5 of the Promotion  Regulations	were
violative of Rule 8(1) of the Recruitment Rules inasmuch  as
the  Promotion	Regulations impinge upon the  State  Govern-
ment's power to make recommendations for appointment to	 the
service; (7) that the State Government deliberately  delayed
its  comments  on the Select List prepared for 1980  to	 the
Public	Service Commission with a view to give undue  advan-
tage to the officers included in the 1979 list for promotion
to the Indian Administrative Service.
Dismissing the Appeals and Writ Petitions,
HELD: By the Court
(Mukharji & K.N. Singh, JJ.)
    Having regard to the legislative history and the purpose
and the object which was sought to be achieved by the amend-
ments  there could be no mandatory legal obligation  on	 the
Committee  to record reasons. Regulation 6(iii)	 merely	 re-
quired	the State Govt. to forward reasons if  recorded	 for
supersession  of the officers to the Commission, but  if  no
reasons	 were  recorded the State Government  was  under  no
legal  obligation to forward the same to the Commission	 and
its  non-compliance  did not vitiate the  Select  List.	 The
entire	system of selection has been changed on	 account  of
amendment in the regulations. [552F-G; D-E]
    Gurdayal Singh Fiji v. State of Punjab & Ors., [1981]  1
SCR 904, followed.
531
    Union  of  India  v. Chothia (H.P.) &  Ors.	 etc.  etc.,
[1978]	3 SCR 652 and Union of India v. Mohan Lal  Capoor  &
Ors., [1974] 1 SCR 797, distinguished.
    P.C. Pradhan v. Union of India & Ors., [1981] 1 SLR	 and
J.S'.  Chopra's case [1980] 2 ILR Punj. 477,  approved.	 Per
K.N. Singh, J.
    1.1 Regulation 5(5) of the Indian Administrative Service
(Appointment  by Promotion) Regulations, 1955 provided	that
if  in	the process of selection, review or revision  it  is
proposed  to supersede any member of the State	Civil/Police
Service the Selection committee shall record its reasons for
the proposed supersession. Regulation 5 was, however, amend-
ed by Notification dated 3.1.1977. [545G]
    1.2	 The  amended provisions of Regulation 5  have	cur-
tailed	and restricted the role of seniority in the  process
of  selection  as  it has given primacy to  merit.  Now	 the
Committee is required to categorise the eligible officers in
four  different.  categories,  namely,	"Outstanding"  "Very
good", "Good" and "Unfit" on overall relative assessment  of
their  service	records. After categorisation  is  made	 the
Committee has to arrange the names of officers in the Select
List  in accordance with the procedure laid down in  Regula-
tion  5(5).  In arranging the names in the Select  List	 the
Committee  has to follow the inter-se seniority of  officers
within	each category. In this process a junior	 officer  if
categorised "Outstanding" or "Very good" would supersede his
seniors. [547A-E]
    1.3	 Where promotion is made on the basis of  seniority,
the  senior has preferential right to promotion against	 his
juniors, but where promotion is made on merit alone,  senior
officer	 has no legal right to promotion and if	 juniors  to
him  are selected for promotion on merit the senior  officer
is not legally superseded. [547E-F]
    2. I Article 16 ensures equality in matters relating  to
appointment  and  promotion to an office or post  under	 the
State.	It enjoins State not to practise  discrimination  in
matters relating to appointment, and promotion. A member  of
the State Civil ServiCe eligible for selection for promotion
to  the I.A.S. has right to be considered  alongwith  others
for  selection for promotion. If eligible officers are	con-
sidered	 on  merit  in an objective  manner,  no  Government
servant has any legal right to insist for promotion nor	 any
such right is protected by Article 14 or 16 of the Constitu-
tion.  Article	16 does not insist that	 reasons  should  be
recorded for the non-selection of a member of a State  Serv-
ice. [548A-C]
532
    2.2 In the absence of a statutory provision an  Adminis-
trative	 Authority  is under no legal obligation  to  record
reasons	 in support of its decision. There is no  scope	 for
applying  principles of natural justice in matters  relating
to selection of suitable members of State Service for promo-
tion to a higher service. [548D-E]
    2.3	 Rules of natural justice are not rigid rules.	They
are flexible and their application depends upon the  setting
and  the back-ground of statutory provisions, nature of	 the
right  which may be affected and the consequences which	 may
entail,	 in the facts and circumstances of each case.  These
principles do not apply to all cases and situations.  Appli-
cation of these uncodified rules is excluded in the interest
of  administrative  efficiency	and  expedition.   Sometimes
legislation itself excludes the application of the rules  by
express provision or by implication. [550B-D]
    2.4	 In the instant case, statutory Regulations  do	 not
expressly  or by implication apply the rule of audi  alteram
partem in making the selection. On the other hand the scheme
contained under the Regulations exclude the applicability of
the  aforesaid rule by implication. Select List is  prepared
each  year which ordinarily continues to be effective for  a
year  or till the fresh Select List is prepared.  If  during
the process of selection a senior officer is proposed to  be
superseded  by	virtue of not being included in	 the  Select
List,  and if opportunity is afforded to him to make  repre-
sentation  and	only thereafter the List is  finalised,	 the
process	 would	be cumbersome and time	consuming.  In	this
process	 it will be difficult for the Committee	 to  prepare
and  finalise the Select List within a reasonable period  of
time and the very purpose of preparing the Select List would
be  defeated. Scheme of the Regulations, therefore,  clearly
warrants exclusion of principles of audi alteram partem.  No
vested	legal right of a member of the State  Civil  Service
who  after being considered, is not included in	 the  Select
List is adversely affected. Non-inclusion in the Select List
does not take away any right of a member of the State  Civil
Service that may have accrued to him as a Government. There-
fore, no opportunity is necessary to be afforded to him	 for
making	representation	against the  proposed  supersession.
[550G-H; 551A-C]
    A.K.  Kraipak  & Ors., etc. etc., v. Union	of  India  &
Ors., [1970] 1 SCR 457, Union of India v. Col. J.N. Sinha  &
Anr., [1971] 1 SCR 791, Chairman Board of Mining Examination
&  Anr.,  v. Ramjee, [1977] 2 SCR 904 and Union of  India  &
Anr., v. Tulsiram Patel etc., [1985] 3 SCC 398, relied upon.
3.1 The scheme contained in promotion Regulations and the
533
criteria prescribed therein for preparing the Select List do
not justify the apprehension that in the absence of  reasons
there  would  be no objectivity and the selection  would  be
made  in  an arbitrary manner over-looking the	claim  on  a
senior officer eligible for promotion to the Indian Adminis-
trative	 Service.  The	principal object  of  the  promotion
system as contained in the Regulations is to secure the best
possible incumbents for promotion to the Indian	 Administra-
tive  Service which is the back-bone of	 the  administrative
machinery of the country. The efficiency of the	 administra-
tion  in the Union as well as in the State  largely  depends
upon  the 'efficiency of the members of the Indian  Adminis-
trative	 Service.  Efficient  public service  is  in  public
interest and the public interest is best secured if reasona-
ble  opportunity  for  promotion exists	 for  all  qualified
members	 of the State Civil Service and only those  who	 are
found  efficient and suitable in all respect  are  promoted.
This  object is sought to be achieved by the Regulations  in
prescribing merit as the sole test for promotion. [553B-D]
    3.2 In order to judge the merit, the Regulations provide
for  categorisation of eligible members of the	State  Civil
Service	 on  the basis of their service	 records  which	 are
scrutinised  by	 the Committee consisting  of  high  ranking
officers of the State Government and the Central Government.
The service records of all eligible officers whose names are
included in the proposed Select List and the records of even
those who are not selected is again scrutinised by the State
Government and the Union Public Service Commission and	only
thereafter  final shape is given to the Select	List.  There
are, therefore, adequate checks and safeguards at  different
stages by different authorities. The machinery designed	 for
preparation of Select List under the Regulations for  promo-
tion  to All India Service, ensures objective and  impartial
selection. Where power is vested in high authority, there is
a  presumption that the same would be exercised	 reasonably.
However,  if the selection is made on extraneous  considera-
tions,	in arbitrary manner, the Courts have ample power  to
strike	down  the  same and that is  an	 adequate  safeguard
against	 the  arbitrary	 exercise of  power.  Therefore,  it
cannot be held that in the absence of reasons the  selection
would be made arbitrarily. [553D-H; 554A-C]
    4.	There are various methods of selection viz. by	com-
petitive  examination,	written	 test-cum-viva-voce,  or  by
assessment  of service records. For the purpose of  recruit-
ment  to the Indian Administrative Service from amongst	 the
officers of the State Civil Service, latter method,  namely,
selection  on the basis of scrutiny of service	records	 has
been accepted. [554E-F]
534
Parvez	Qadir  v. Union of India & Ors., [1975] 2  SCR	432,
relied upon.
    5.1	 There	is hardly any scope for	 applying  different
standards  or  criteria at different times  as	the  service
records,  namely, the character roll entries would  indicate
the  category of the officers as adjudged by  the  authority
recording annual confidential remarks. In Punjab the author-
ity  competent	to record annual remarks  in  the  character
coils  of members of the State Civil Service, has  been	 di-
rected to indicate the category of the officer, e.g. whether
the  officer is "Outstanding", "Very Good" or "Good".  Under
instructions  issued by the Union Government all  the  State
Governments  are following similar pattern  in	categorising
members	 of  the State Civil Service in the  annual  remarks
made  in  their	 confidential  records.	 This  has   brought
uniformity in the character role entries. [555G-H; 556A-C]
    5.2 Since category of members of State Civil Service  is
available  in  their service records, the Committee  has  no
discretion  to	disregard the same. Therefore, there  is  no
merit  in the submission that Regulations 3 and 5  are	dis-
criminatory  and  they	violate Articles 14 and	 16  of	 the
Constitution. [556C-D]
    6.1	 The material placed on record leaves no doubt	that
Shri I.C. Puri designated as Financial Commissioner  (Devel-
opment) was also discharging the duties and functions of the
Development  Commissioner.  He was, therefore,	holding	 the
dual charge as no separate post of Development	Commissioner
had  been sanctioned by the Government. These facts  clearly
show that for all purposes Shri Puff was working as Develop-
ment  Commissioner. As Financial Commissioner  (Development)
he was exercising same powers and discharging same functions
which  could  he performed by  a  Development  Commissioner,
therefore  he was competent to participate in the  delibera-
tions of the Selection Committee. Moreover, at no stage	 any
objection  was raised against functioning of Shri Puri as  a
member	of the Selection Committee or his  participation  in
the  deliberations. There is further no allegations of	mala
fide or bias against Shri Puff. There is evidence on  record
to  show  that recommendations of  the	Selection  Committee
constituted  under Regulation 3 were unanimous,	 which	were
scrutinised  by	 the State Government and the  Union  Public
Service	 Commission  before the same were  approved.  [557H;
558A-C]
       6.2 In the instant  case, the validity of the  recom-
mendations  made or the preparation of select List  of	1979
are not vitiated as Shri I.C.
535
Puri  was neither biased against any of the  appellant/peti-
tioners,  nor  there was any conflict between  his  personal
interest and duty. Shri Pun had no interest in the inclusion
or exclusion of any member of the State Civil Service nor he
had any personal interest in preparing the List. There is no
allegation of bias or malice against Shri Puri. His partici-
pation	in  the meeting of the Selection Committee  did	 not
render the Select List of 1979 illegal. [558H; 559A]
    7.	The Central Government has framed promotion  Regula-
tions which provide method and manner of selection.  Regula-
tion  3 provides for constitution of Selection Committee  to
prepare List of suitable officers in accordance with Regula-
tion  5.  The  list so prepared is forwarded  by  the  State
Government to the Union Public Service Commission along with
the records and the observations of the State Government  in
accordance  with  Regulation 6. Thereafter,  the  Commission
considers the List under Regulation 7. The Commission  shall
finally approve the List received from the State  Government
with such modification as in its opinion it may be just	 and
proper	and  this List forms the Select List of	 members  of
State Civil Service which ordinarily remains in force  until
its  review  and revision. Regulation 9 lays down  that	 the
appointment of members of State Civil Service shall be	mode
by  the	 Central Government on the  recommendations  of	 the
State Government in the order in which their names appear in
the  Select  List. These Regulations do not  in	 any  manner
impinge	 upon  the powers of the State	Government  to	make
recommendations to the Central Government as contemplated by
Rule  8	 of the IAS (Recruitment)  Rules,  1954.  Therefore,
Regulations 3, 5 and 7 of the IAS (Appointment by Promotion)
Regulations, 1955 are not ultra vires. [559F-H; B]
    8. In the instant case, the Select List of 1979  contin-
ued  to he effective till Select List for the year 1980	 was
finally	 ap-
proved.	 The  officers included in the Select List  of	1979
were promoted and appointed to IAS before the final approval
of  the Select List for the year 1980. Therefore, no  excep-
tion can be taken to the validity of their appointment.	 The
delay  made by the State Government in forwarding  its	com-
ments to the Union Public Service Commission with regard  to
the 1980 List did not cause any prejudice to the petitioners
as none them was selected for inclusion in 1980 List. Merely
because	 the State Government forwarded its  recommendations
with  delay is not sufficient to justify inference that	 the
delay  was purposive with a  view to grant undue  favour  of
select List and its final approval is time consuming,  some-
times delay may be inevitable.	State Government should take
536
action well in advance to avoid any delay. If undue delay is
caused in preparation of Select List, it provides  occasions
for  suspicion against the authorities and it is  likely  to
generate frustration and heart burning among the members  of
the State Civil Service which would obviously be detrimental
to public administration. [560F; 561A-B]
Per Mukharji, J.
    I.	It cannot be said now-a-days if one is aware of	 the
facts and currents of Me that simply because  categorisation
and  judgment of the service records of officers are in	 the
hands  of senior officers is a sufficient  safeguard.  There
has  been  considerable erosion in the	intrinsic  sense  of
fairness  and  justice in the senior officers  by  all	con-
cerned.	 From  the  instances of conduct of  many,  some  of
senior officers and men in high position, it cannot be	said
that such erosion is not only unjustified. [539A-B]
    2. In order to rule out any grievance actual or fancied,
some  objective basis for the categorisation should be	laid
down. If such objective basis are made known, the fact	that
after  categorisation, the selection of junior	officers  in
preference  to	senior officers need not state	reasons	 and
would  not be violative of the canons of justice but  other-
wise there will be room for suspicion and that too would not
be wholly unjustified. [539C]
    3. It is suggested to the Government and the authorities
concerned that there should be some basis for the  categori-
sation.	 of the officers and such basis should be  objective
and  not merely subjective evaluation and  furthermore	such
basis should be formulated in the form of guidelines. [539D]
    4. Objectivity in subjective evaluation of the worth  of
the  different	officers would go a long way to	 generate  a
feeling that justice has been done and unless members of the
administration feel that justice has been done to them,	 the
administration cannot become an effective weapon for  social
change ushering social justice. [539D-E]



JUDGMENT:
    CIVIL  APPELLATE JURISDICTIIN: Civil Appeal No. 4370  of
1983 etc.
    From  the  Judgment and Order dated 26.11. 1979  of	 the
Punjab	and  Haryana High Court in Civil Writ  No.  3821  of
1979.
537
    R.K. Garg, R.S. Dass-in-person, B.S. Khoji, Arun Madar &
T.S. Arora for the Appellants/Petitioners.
    G.A.  Shah,	 V.C. Mahajan, Anil Dev Singh,	L.K.  Gupta,
C.V. Subba Rao, R.S. Sodhi, G.D. Gupta, A.C.  Sharma-in-per-
son, Arvind Minocha, Inderjit Malhotra, M.S. Dhillon for the
Respondents.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
    SABYASACHI	MUKHARJI,  J. I have had  the  advantage  of
reading the judgment in draft to be delivered by my  learned
brother K.N. Singh, J. I agree with him that the appeals and
the  writ petitions herein should be dismissed	without	 any
order as to costs. I also respectfully agree with him on the
conclusions  he	 has reached on	 the  different	 contentions
urged before us in these cases. It is not necessary to refer
to  the	 facts and the issues which have  been	exhaustively
discussed  by  my learned brother. There  is,  however,	 one
aspect	of the matter on which I have  certain	reservations
and I would like to express my views on this aspect so	that
the  Government	 and the authorities concerned	may  try  to
evolve a little more objective basis on that aspect.
    As mentioned, the validity of the Select Lists of  1978,
1979, 1980 and 1983 for promotion to the Indian	 Administra-
tive  Service  was impugned in these matters on	 the  ground
that  the Committee had not recorded any reasons for  super-
seding	the appellants and/or petitioners. The	question  of
recording  of reasons had been discussed in the decision  of
this Court where Select List was quashed on the ground	that
the  Committee had failed to record reasons  in	 superseding
senior	officers.  In  view of Regulation 5(1)	to  5(5)  as
prevailing at the relevant time which came up for  interpre-
tation	in  Union  of India v. Mohan Lal  Capoor  &  Others,
[1974] 1 SCR 797, this Court quashed the Select List on	 the
ground	that the Committee had failed to record	 reasons  in
superseding senior officers. It was held that it was  incum-
bent  on the Selection Committee to have stated	 reasons  in
view of the said Regulation in a manner which would disclose
as  to how the record of superseded officers was  judged  in
relation to the record of those officers who were  preferred
for  selection. This Court reiterated in the context of	 the
said  Regulation  that there was a mandatory  obligation  to
record reasons in superseding senior officers, and therefore
'in  the  absence of such reasons the Select List  had	been
vitiated.
    Regulation 5 was, however, as noted by my learned broth-
er,  amended  by Notification dated 3rd	 January,  1977	 and
after the amend-
538
ment, Regulation 5(4) and 5(5) was altered. It was  provided
that the Selection Committee should classify eligible  offi-
cers as 'Outstanding", "Very Good", "Good" or 'Unfit" as the
case might be on overall relative assessment of their  serv-
ice  record. The Committee was required to categorise  offi-
cers in four categories on the basis of an overall  relative
assessment of service record of the officers. After categor-
isation	 the  Committee was required to place the  names  of
those officers first on the list who might be categorised as
"Outstanding"  and  thereafter those officers  as  mentioned
aforesaid. Under the amended Regulation if a senior  officer
is superseded, the amended Regulation 5(5) does not  require
the  Committee to record reasons for such supersession.	 The
new  amended Regulation emphasised that the merit and  suit-
ability was the governing consideration and seniority played
only a subsidiary role. It was only when merits were roughly
equal, seniority was the relevant determining factor.  Regu-
lation 5(5) as it stood prior to Capoor's case laid emphasis
on the role of seniority. This has been done away with.
    It	is stated on behalf of the respondents that  it	 was
felt difficult to record reasons in the prescribed manner as
laid  down by this Court in the said decision and the  ques-
tion was considered by a Conference of Chief Secretaries  in
May,  1976 and was further considered. The Committee  recom-
mended	that the system of categorisation' of  officers	 for
promotion  to the higher post should be followed in case  of
All India Service also and thereafter the categorisation  as
noted  above was introduced in consultation with  the  State
Governments.  Indeed  the  amended  provision  Regulation  5
minimised the role of seniority in the process of  selection
and  importance and primacy was given to merit. This  indeed
is  a laudable object and helps in having the best  for	 the
country. It is also true that if selection is made on  merit
alone for promotion to higher service, selection of such  an
officer though junior in service in preference to his senior
does not really amount to supersession. If promotion is made
on merit alone, the senior officer per se has no legal right
to promotion and if promotion is made on merit, it cannot be
said that a senior officer has been superseded. It has	been
emphasised  that the categorisation is done on	the  service
record. This has also been emphasised that such	 categorisa-
tion  is done on the service record  including	confidential
character  rolls  as maintained by senior  officers  holding
high  positions. It is, therefore, according to	 my  learned
brother, sufficient safeguard against arbitrary	 categorisa-
tion  and  misuse of power. I have my reservations  on	this
aspect	though I accede the position that in the absence  of
any other practicable solution, this is perhaps a sufficient
safeguard and perhaps
539
a practical way of facing a rather delicate task. It  cannot
be said now-a-days if one is aware of the facts and currents
of  life that simply because categorisation and judgment  of
the  service record of officers are in the hands  of  senior
officers is a sufficient safeguard. There has been consider-
able erosion in the intrinsic sense of fairness and  justice
in the senior officers by all concerned. From the  instances
of conduct of many, some of senior officers and men in	high
position,  it cannot be said that such erosion is  not	only
unjustified.
    In	order to rule out any grievance actual	or  fancied,
some  objective basis for the categorisation in	 the  manner
indicated  should be laid down. If.such objective basis	 are
made  known, the fact that after categorisation, the  selec-
tion  of junior officers 'in preference to  senior  officers
need  not  state reasons and would not be violative  of	 the
canons	of  justice  but otherwise there will  be  room	 for
suspicion and that too would not be wholly unjustified.
    I would therefore like to suggest to the Government	 and
the  authorities concerned that there should be	 some  basis
for the categorisation of the officers and such basis should
be  objective and not merely subjective evaluation and	fur-
thermore  such	basis should be formulated in  the  form  of
guidelines.  Objectivity  in subjective	 evaluation  of	 the
worth  of  the	different officers would go a  long  way  to
generate  a feeling that ,justice has been done	 and  unless
members	 of  the administration feel that justice  has	been
done to them, the administration cannot become an  effective
weapon for social change ushering social justice,
    I,	however, hasten to add that in these cases  I  agree
with  my learned brother that justice has been done  in	 ac-
cordance with the rules to the officers concerned and there-
fore concur with him in the order as proposed.
    SINGH, J: These three Civil Appeals are directed against
the  judgment  of Division Bench of Punjab  &  Haryana	High
Court dismissing the writ petitions filed by R.S. Das,	Mrs.
K.  Goyal challenging the validity of the Select  List	pre-
pared  for the year 1978, 1979 for promotion of	 members  of
Punjab State Civil Service (Executive) to the Indian  Admin-
istrative  Service, During the pendency of these appeals  17
writ petitions were filed before this Court under Article 32
of  the Constitution by Pritam Singh, Ajit Singh Nagpal	 and
other members of the Punjab State Civil Service	 (Executive)
challenging  the validity of Select List prepared  ,for	 the
year 1979, 1980 and 1983. As all the cases rest upon similar
facts and involve common questions of law,
540
these  were heard together and we consider it  necessary  to
dispose them of by common judgment.
    R.S. Das, Mrs. K. Goyal and Baldev Kapoor members of the
Punjab	State Civil Service (Executive) had  completed	more
than  eight  years  of service and they	 were  eligible	 for
promotion  to  the Indian Administrative Service  but  their
names  were  not included in the Select List  for  the	year
1978,  while the names of officers junior to them  were	 in-
cluded	in  the	 Select List. R.S. Das, Mrs.  K.  Goyal	 and
Baldev	Kapoor filed three separate petitions before  Punjab
and Haryana High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution
challenging  the  validity  of Select List  of	1978.  Their
grievance  was	that though they were  senior,	having	good
service	 record yet they were superseded by officers  junior
to them in an arbitrary manner without recording any reasons
for  the same. A Division Bench of the High Court  dismissed
all the three petitions by a common order dated November 20,
1979  rendered	in  Baldev Kapoor's [1980] 2  SLR  309	case
holding that the Select List prepared for the year 1978	 did
not suffer from any legal infirmity. During the pendency  of
the  aforesaid petitions, another Select List  was  prepared
for the year 1979 and in that List also the name of R.S. Das
was not included. He filed another writ petition challenging
the  validity of that Select List also almost, on  the	same
grounds, that writ petition was also dismissed by the  Divi-
sion Bench on November 26, 1979. R.S. Das and Mrs. K.  Goyal
have  preferred appeal before this Court by  special  leave.
During	the  pendency of these Appeals Pritam Singh  and  15
other  officers	 of the State Civil Service  challenged	 the
validity of Select List prepared for the year 1979 and	1980
before this Court by means of petitions under Article 32  of
the Constitution. Ajit Singh Nagpal and other officers filed
a similar petitions challenging the validity of Select	List
prepared for the year 1983. The challenge to the validity of
the  Select List for the year 1978, 1979, 1980 and 1983	 are
almost on similar grounds.
    Before the High Court S/Shri R.S. Das, Baldev Kapoor and
Smt.  K. Goel challenged the validity of the Select List  of
1978 on the ground that mandatory provisions of Regulation 6
of the Indian Administrative Service (Appointment by  Promo-
tion)  Regulations,  1955 (hereinafter referred	 to  as	 the
Regulations)  were violated in making the selection  as	 the
service	 records of eligible 'state officers including	that
of  the	 petitioners  had not been forwarded  to  the  Union
Public Service Commission and its approval was given without
considering  the recommendations made by the Selection	Com-
mittee.	 Amendment made in Regulation 5 deleting the  provi-
sions which required reasons to be
541
recorded for the supersession of a state officer, was  arbi-
trary  and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.	 The
petitioners further challenged the vires of the	 Regulations
on  the ground of their being inconsistent with	 the  Indian
Administrative Service (Recruitment) Rules 1954 (hereinafter
referred to as the Rules) and inclusion of name of K.S. Raju
was  assailed on the ground that he had earned	adverse	 re-
marks  and  yet	 he was selected.  The	petitioners  further
raised	grievance  that important material relating  to	 the
petitioners'  service including certificate and	 letters  of
recommendations	 as contained in their service records	were
not considered by the selection committee. The High Court by
a  well considered judgment rendered in Beldev Singh's	case
(supra) dismissed all the three writ petitions on the  find-
ings that the select list prepared for the year 1978 was  in
accordance  with the regulations and it did not suffer	from
any legal infirmity. It appears that validity of the  Select
List  of 1978 was challenged by J.S. Chopra and other  offi-
cers of the state civil service before the High Court  under
Article 226 of the Constitution on the same ground which had
already	 been rejected by the Division Bench in	 Baldev	 Ka-
poor's	case (supra). However having regard to the  decision
of  this  Court in Union of India v. Chothia (H.P)  &  Ors.,
etc.  etc.,  [1978] 3 SCR 652. Division Bench  referred	 the
matter	for consideration to a larger bench on the  question
as  to	whether the Select List was vitiated  for  the	non-
compliance of Regulation 6(iii) inasmuch as reasons for	 the
supersession  of senior officers were not forwarded  to	 the
Commission.  The Full Bench of the High Court held that	 the
decision of this Court in Chothia's case did not affect	 the
position  and the Division Bench decision in Baldev  Singh's
case correctly laid down the law.
    In the present appeals and petitions learned counsel for
the  appellants	 and the petitioners as well  as  Shri	R.S.
Dass,  appellant who appeared in person argued the case	 and
have made the following submissions:
	      (1) The select list of 1978-79, 1980 and	1983
	      are vitiated on the ground that select commit-
	      tee did not record any reasons in	 superseding
	      the appellants/petitioners in excluding  their
	      names and including the names of junior  offi-
	      cers in the select list.
	      (2) Amendment of the Regulation 5(7) is viola-
	      tive  of	Articles  14 and 16  as	 it  confers
	      unguided	power on the Selection Committee  to
	      supersede senior officers.
	      542
	      (3) The select list prepared for the year 1978
	      was vitiated for the non-compliance of Regula-
	      tion  6(iii) as no reasons were  forwarded  by
	      the  State Committee to the  Commission  along
	      with record of officers proposed to be  super-
	      seded.
	      (4)  Even if under the Regulations no  reasons
	      were  necessary to be recorded, principles  of
	      Natural  Justice and fair play  required	that
	      reason should have been recorded.
	      (5)  The	select list prepared  for  the	year
	      1978,  1979  was vitiated on  account  of	 the
	      unauthorised  participation of Shri I.C.	Puri
	      as a member of the Selection Committee.
	      (6)  Regulations	3  and 5  of  the  Promotion
	      Regulation  are violative of rule 8(1) of	 the
	      recruitment  rules inasmuch as the   Promotion
	      Regulations  impinge  upon the  State  Govern-
	      ment's   power to	 make	recommendations	 for
	      appointment to the service.
	      (7) The State Government deliberately  delayed
	      its  comments on the select list prepared	 for
	      1980  to the Public Service Commission with  a
	      view  to give undue advantage to the  officers
	      included in the 1979 list for promotion to the
	      Indian Administrative Service.
    Before we consider the submissions made on behalf of the
appellants/petitioners we think it necessary to refer to the
relevant  statutory provisions regulating promotion of	mem-
bers of the State Civil Service to the Indian Administrative
Service.  The Central Government in exercise of	 its  powers
under  section 3 of the All India Services Act, 1951  flamed
Indian	Administrative	Service	 (Recruitment)	Rules,	1954
(hereinafter referred to as the Rules). Rule 4 provides	 for
recruitment to the service, according to this rule  recruit-
ment  to the Indian Administrative Service is made  by:	 (i)
direct	recruitment  through competitive  examination;	(ii)
promotion of substantive members of the State Civil  Service
(Executive) and (iii) Selection from amongst persons holding
posts in substantial capacity in connection with the affairs
of  the	 State, who may not be members of  the	State  Civil
Service.  Rule 6 provides that no appointment shall be	made
to  the Indian Administrative Service (hereinafter  referred
to as the Service) except in accordance with the recruitment
by  one of the methods specified in rule 4. Rule 7  provides
for direct recruitment through competitive examination. Rule
8(1) confers power on the Central
543
Government to appoint members of the State Civil Service  by
promotion to the Service on the recommendation of the  State
Government and in consultation with the Union Public Service
Commission  in	accordance  with Regulations  which  may  be
flamed by the Central Government.-In exercise of its  powers
under Rule 8(1) the Central Government has flamed the Indian
Administrative	Service (Appointment by	 Promotion)  Regula-
tions,	1955  (hereinafter referred to as  the	Regulations)
laying	down procedure of selection for appointment  to	 the
service by promotion. Regulation 3 provides for constitution
of  a  Committee  consisting of the Chairman  of  the  Union
Public Service Commission or a member of the Commission	 and
other  members as specified in column 2 to the	schedule  to
the  Regulations. Regulation 5 provides that  the  Committee
shall ordinarily meet at intervals not exceeding one year to
prepare the list of such members of the State Civil  Service
found  suitable for promotion to the service on	 an  overall
relative  assessment of the service. This list	prepared  by
the  Committee is forwarded to the Commission by  the  State
Government  along with the records of members of  those	 se-
lected	as well as of those proposed be superseded  together
with  the observation of the State Government on the  recom-
mendation'of  the Committee. Regulation 7 provides that	 the
Union  Public  Service Commission shall	 consider  the	list
along with the documents received from the State  Government
and  on	 its approval the list so approved  shall  form	 the
Select List of the. members of the State Civil Service.	 The
Select List shall ordinarily be in force until a fresh	list
is prepared and approved for the subsequent year. Regulation
8  lays down that appointment of members of the State  Civil
Service	 shall	be  made by the Central	 Government  on	 the
recommendations	 of  the State Government in the  order,  in
which the names of members of the State Civil Service appear
in  the Select List. These Regulations clearly	provide	 for
the  selection	of officers of the State  Civil	 Service  on
merit  on the overall relative assessment of  their  service
record.	 In the process of preparing the select list if	 the
seniors are not found suitable for promotion and their names
in  the select list is not included and, if junior  officers
are  found suitable for the inclusion of their names in	 the
Select List, the seniors stand superseded, as the  selection
is made on merit and not on the overall relative  assessment
of  their  service record. In the process of  preparing	 the
select list if the seniors are not found suitable for promo-
tion and their names in the select list is not included and,
if  junior officers are found suitable for the inclusion  of
their names in the Select List, the seniors stand  supersed-
ed,  as the selection is made on merit and not on the  basis
of seniority
544
    Learned counsel for the appellants/petitioners  assailed
the validity of the Select List of 1978, 1979, 1980 and 1983
on the ground that the Committee did not record any  reasons
in  superseding the appellants and petitioners. Support	 was
drawn  from the decision of this Court in Union of India  v.
Mohan Lal Capoor & Ors., [1974] 1 SCR 797 where Select	List
was  quashed on the ground that the Committee had failed  to
record	reasons	 in superseding senior officers.  The  Court
held  that  it was incumbent on the Selection  Committee  to
have  stated reasons in a manner which would disclose as  to
how  the record of superseded officers stood in relation  to
the  record of those officers who were preferred for  selec-
tion.  The Court further held that the	Selection  Committee
was under a mandatory obligation to record reasons in super-
seding	senior officers, in the absence of any such  reasons
the Select List was vitiated. Regulation 5(1) to 5(5)  which
came  up  for interpretation before this Court	in  Capoor's
case were as under:
	      5(1)  The	 Committee shall prepare a  list  of
	      such members of the State Civil/Police Service
	      as satisfy the condition specified in  regula-
	      tion 4 and as are held by the Committee to  be
	      suitable	for  promotion to the  service.	 The
	      number  of members of the	 State	Civil/Police
	      Service included in the list shall not be more
	      than twice the number of substantive vacancies
	      anticipated  in  the  course  of	the   period
	      twelve' months commencing from the date of the
	      preparation of the list.
	      (2)  The Selection for inclusion in such	list
	      shall be based on merit and suitability in all
	      respects with due regard to seniority.
	      (3) The names of the officers included in	 the
	      list  shall be arranged in order of  seniority
	      in the State Civil/Police Service.
		       Provided that any junior officer	 who
	      in  the opinion of the Committee is of  excep-
	      tional merit and suitability may be  assigned,
	      a place in the list higher than that of  offi-
	      cers Senior to him.
	      (4) The list so prepared shall be reviewed and
	      revised every year.
	      545
	      (5) If in the process of selection, review  or
	      revision	it  is	proposed  to  supersede	 any
	      member of the State Civil/ Police Service	 the
	      Committee	 shall	record its reasons  for	 the
	      proposed supersession.
On construction of the aforesaid Regulation 5(5) this  court
held that it was a mandatory obligation on the Committee  to
record	reasons	 if  it proposed supersession  of  a  senior
member	of the State Civil Service. The court  further	held
that since no reasons were recorded the Committee had failed
to  discharge a mandatory obligation, as a result  of  which
the  list prepared by it was rendered illegal. Regulation  5
was.  however, amended by notification dated  3.6.1977,	 and
after the amendment Regulation 5(4) and (5) read as under:
	      5(4)  "The Selection Committee shall  classify
	      eligible	officers  as  "Outstanding",   "Very
	      Good" "Good" or "Unfit" as the case may be  on
	      an overall relative assessment of their  serv-
	      ice record.
	      5(5)  The list shall be prepared by  including
	      the  required  number  of	 names,	 first	from
	      amongst	officers  finally.   classified	  as
	      "Outstanding",  then from amongst those  simi-
	      larly  classified	 as "Very  Good"  thereafter
	      from  amongst  those similarly  classified  as
	      "Good"  and  the order of the names  inter  se
	      within each category shall be, in the order of
	      their seniority in the State Civil Service."
    Under the amended Regulations the Committee is  required
to  categorise officers in four categories on the  basis  of
overall	 assessment  of service record	of  officers.  After
categorisation	the committee is required to place the	name
of  those officers first on the list who may be	 categorised
as  "Outstanding"  and thereafter names	 of  those  officers
shall be included who are found to be "Very Good". And	only
thereafter the names of those officers shall be included who
may  be	 categorised "GOod". If in this process	 any  senior
officer	 is superseded the amended Regulation 5(5) does	 not
require	 the Committee to record reasons for  the  superses-
sion.  The amended Regulations have brought  in	 significant
change	and now the process of Selection as contemplated  by
Amended	 Regulations do not require the Selection  Committee
to  record reasons for the supersession of officers  of	 the
State Civil Service.
In Capoor's case the Regulation 5(2) as it then existed laid
546
down that selection for inclusion in the list shall be based
"on  merit  and suitability with due  regard  to  seniority"
which  meant that merit and suitability in all respects	 was
the  governing	consideration and seniority was	 to  play  a
secondary  role, but if merit and suitability  were  roughly
equal, seniority was the determining factor or if it was not
reasonably possible to assess inter-se merit and suitability
of  two	 eligible officers and come to	a  firm	 conclusion,
seniority  tilted  the	scale. Regulation 5(5)	as  it	then
existed	 laid emphasis on the role of seniority as  it	laid
down that in the process of selection, review or revision of
the  select list if it was proposed to supersede any  member
of  State  Civil  Service, the Committee  shall	 record	 its
reasons	 for  the proposed supersession.  The  necessity  to
record reasons clearly implied that seniority of an  officer
in  the State Service could not be ignored altogether.	This
Court  in  Capoor's  case held that if	senior	officer	 was
superseded by including the name of a Junior Officer in	 the
select list in preference to a senior officer, the Committee
was under a mandatory legal obligation to record reasons  in
a manner which would disclose how the record of each officer
superseded,  stood in relation to record of others who	were
to be preferred. The court further emphasised that recording
of reasons was necessary as it provided a visible  safeguard
against	 possible injustice and arbitrariness in making	 the
selection.  It appears that the Committee  making  selection
constituted  for  the purpose of preparing the	select	list
felt difficulty in recording reasons, in the precise  manner
as laid down by this Court. The question was considered by a
conference  of	Chief Secretaries held in May, 1976  and  it
appointed a Committee to consider the question. The  Commit-
tee  noted that consequent to the judgment of this Court  in
Capoor's case, there was tendency for the Selection  Commit-
tee  to	 go  by seniority subject to the  rejection  of	 the
unfit,	even  though  Regulations prescribed  merit  as	 the
criteria  for  selection. The Committee	 reported  that	 the
system	of categorisation of officers for promotion  to	 the
Higher Post should be followed in case of All India Services
also.  After  considering the report of the  Committee,	 the
Conference of Chief Secretaries made recommendations to	 the
Union Government that necessary amendment should be made  in
the  Regulations providing for grading of eligible  officers
as  "Outstanding",  "Very Good", "Good" for the	 purpose  of
being  placed in the select list to ensure that select	list
is  drawn  upon the basis of merit and	suitability  and  to
obviate the necessity of giving reasons for the supersession
of any officer.
    In pursuance to the recommendations of the Chief  Secre-
taries	Conference  the Central Government  in	consultation
with  the  State Governments and the  Union  Public  Service
Commission, amended
547
Regulation  5  by its notification  No.	 11089/6/76-AIS(1)-A
dated 3.6.1977.
    The	 amended provisions of Regulation 5  have  curtailed
and  restricted	 the  role of seniority in  the	 process  of
selection as it has given primacy to merit. Now the  Commit-
tee is required tO categorise the eligible officers in	four
different  categories,	namely	"Outstanding"  "Very  Good",
"Good"	and "Unfit" on overall relative assessment of  their
service records. After categorisation is made the  Committee
has  to arrange the names of officers in the select list  in
accordance with the procedure laid down in regulation  5(5).
In arranging the names in the select list the Committee	 has
to  follow  the inter-se seniority of officers	within	each
category.  If there are five officers fail within the  "Out-
standing"  category  their names shall be  arranged  in	 the
order having regard to their inter-se seniority in the State
Civil  Service. The same principle is followed in  arranging
the  list from amongst the officers falling in the  category
of  "Very Good" and "Good". Similarly if a junior  officer's
name finds place in the category of "Outstanding", he  would
be  placed  higher  in the list in preference  to  a  senior
officer	 included in the "Very Good" or "Good" category.  In
this  process a junior officer if categorised  "Outstanding"
or  "Very Good" would supersede his seniors. This cannot  be
helped. Where selection made on merit alone for promotion to
a  higher service, selection of an officer though junior  in
service	 in  preference'  to his senior	 does  not  strictly
amount to supersession. Where promotion is made on the basis
of seniority, the senior has preferential fight to promotion
against	 his  juniors but where promotion is made  on  merit
alone, senior officer has no legal right to promotion and if
juniors	 to  him  are selected for promotion  on  merit	 the
senior officer is not legally superseded. When merit is	 the
criteria for the selection amongst the members of the  serv-
ice,  no officer has legal fight to be selected	 for  promo-
tion,  except that he has only right to be considered  along
with  others.  In Gurdayal Singh Fiji v. State of  Punjab  &
0rs.,,[1982]  1	 SCR 904. This court held that a  member  of
State Civil Service has no legal right to promotion, instead
he  has only right to be considered along, with others.	 BUt
assuming that appellants/petitioners stood superseded by the
reason	that  junior officers to them were included  in	 the
select	list,  no reasons were necessary to be	recorded  in
view of the amended statutory provisions.
    Learned  counsel. urged that reasons if recorded  ensure
objectivity and impartiality. In :he absence of reasons	 the
Committee  may act in arbitrary manner to  supersede  senior
officers which would be
548
violative of Article 14 and 16 of the Constitution. We	find
no  merit in the submission. Article 16 ensures equality  in
matters relating to appointment and promotion to an  officer
or  post under the State. It enjoins State not	to  practice
descrimination in matters relating to appointment and promo-
tion.  A  member  of the State Civil  Service  eligible	 for
selection  for promotion to the I.A.S. has right to be	con-
sidered	 alongwith  others for selection for  promotion.  If
eligible  officers are considered on merit, in an  objective
manner	no Govt. servant has any legal right to	 insist	 for
promotion nor any such right is protected by the Article  14
or  16 of the Constitution. Article 16 does not insist	that
reasons should be recorded for the non-selection of a member
of a State Service.
    Learned  counsel urged that in the absence of  statutory
provision, principles of natural justice require the  selec-
tion  committee	 to record reasons for the  supersession  of
officers to enable them to make representation against their
supersession.
    We find no merit in the submission. Principles of  natu-
ral justice do not require an administrative authority or  a
selection committee or an examiner to record reasons for the
selection or non-selection of a person. In the absence of  a
statutory provision an administrative authority is under  no
legal  obligation to record reasons in support of its  deci-
sion. There is no scope for applying principles' of  natural
justice in matters relating to selection of suitable members
of  State  Service  for promotion to a	higher	service.  In
Mohanlal  Capoor's  case similar submission  was  made	that
principles  of	natural	 justice  require  communication  of
reasons	 to the officer proposed to be superseded to  enable
him  to	 make representation. Both the	learned	 Judges	 who
constituted  the Bench repelled the contention.	 Mathew,  J.
held  that  no notice was required to be given to  a  senior
officer	 if he was proposed to be superseded in favour of  a
junior	on the ground of his greater merit and	suitability,
'the learned judge further observed that it was not  expedi-
ent  to extend the horizon of natural justice. Beg, J.	also
rejected the submission that minimal requirement of just and
fair  treatment in such a situation would be to	 inform	 the
officer	 to  be	 superseded, the reasons  recorded  for	 his
proposed supersession to enable him to make  representation.
On  such a ground expansion of scope of natural justice	 was
not justified.
    The principle of audi alteram partem is a basic  concept
of principles of natural justice. No one should be condemned
without	 hearing  is he essence of justice.  Courts  of	 law
apply this principle to ensure fair
549
play and justice in judicial and quasi-judicial matters.  Of
late these principles have been extended even to administra-
tive  actions  also. However, the application  of  the	audi
alteram	 partem rule is not applicable to all  eventualities
or  to	cure all ills. Its application is  excluded  in	 the
interest of administrative efficiency and expedition.  Some-
times  legislation  itself excludes the application  of	 the
rule. It is difficult to conceive exhaustively all eventual-
ities and circumstances for application or exclusion of	 the
rule. In A.K. Kraipak & Ors., etc. etc., v. Union of India &
Ors.,  [1970] 1 SCR 457 a Constitution Bench of	 this  Court
held  these rules operate only in areas not covered  by	 any
law  validly made. In other words they do not  supplant	 the
law  of	 the land but supplement it. They are  not  embodied
rules  and  their  aim is to secure justice  or	 to  prevent
miscarriage  of justice. If that is their purpose, there  is
no reason why they should not be made applicable to adminis-
trative proceedings also, especially when it is not easy  to
draw the line that demarcates, administrative enquiries from
quasi-judicial	ones, and an unjust decision in an  adminis-
trative	 enquiry may have a more far reaching effect than  a
decision  in a quasi-judicial enquiry. The  Bench,  however,
further	 observed that the concept of natural  justice	have
under  gone  a great deal of change in	recent	years.	What
particular  rule of natural justice should apply to a  given
case must depend to a great extent on the facts and  circum-
stances of that case, the flame-work of the law under  which
the enquiry is held and the Constitution of the Tribunal  or
the body of persons appointed for that purpose.
    In	Union of India v. Col, J.N. Sinha & Anr.,  [1971]  1
SCR 791 this Court held that if a statutory provision either
specifically or by necessary implication excludes the appli-
cation of any or all the principles of natural justice	then
the  court cannot ignore the mandate of the  legislature  or
the  statutory authority and read into the concerned  provi-
sions  the principles of natural justice. Whether the  exer-
cise of a power conferred should be made in accordance	with
any of the principles of natural justice or not depends upon
the  express  words of the provision conferring	 power,	 the
nature	of the power conferred, the purpose for which it  is
conferred and the effect of the exercise of that power.
    In	Chairman,  Board of Mining Examination	&  Anr.,  v.
Ramjee,	 [1977] 2 SCR 904 Krishna Iyer, J. speaking for	 the
Court observed:
	      "Natural Justice is no unruly horse, no  lurk-
	      ing  land	 mine, nor a judicial  cure-all.  If
	      fairness is shown by the decision
	      550
	      maker to the man proceeded against, the  form,
	      features	and the fundamentals of such  essen-
	      tial processual propriety being conditioned by
	      the facts and circumstances of such situation,
	      no breach of natural justice can be complained
	      of.   Unnatural expansion of natural  justice,
	      without reference to the administrative reali-
	      ties and other factors of a given case, can be
	      exasperating.  We can neither be	finical	 nor
	      fanatical	 but should be flexible yet firm  in
	      this jurisdiction."
    It is well established that rules of natural justice are
not  rigid  rules, they are flexible and  their	 application
depends	 upon the setting and the back-ground  of  statutory
provision, nature of the right which may be effected and the
consequences which may entail, its application depends	upon
the  facts and circumstances of each case. These  principles
do  not apply to all cases and situations.  Applications  of
these uncodified rules are often excluded by express  provi-
sion or by implication. In Union of India & Anr., v.  Tulsi-
ram  Patel  etc., [1985] 3 SCC 398 a Constitution  Bench  of
this Court considered the scope and extent of  applicability
of principles of natural justice to administrative  actions.
Madon,	J summarised the position of law on this  point	 and
observed as follows:
	      "So  far as the audi alteram partern  rule  is
	      concerned, both in England and in India, it is
	      well established that where a right to a prior
	      notice  and an opportunity to be heard  before
	      an  order is passed would obstruct the  taking
	      of prompt action such a right can be excluded.
	      This  right  can also be	excluded  where	 the
	      nature  of the action to be taken, its  object
	      and  purpose  and the scheme of  the  relevant
	      statutory	 provisions warrant  its  exclusion;
	      nor  can the audi alteram partem rule  be	 in-
	      voked if importing it would have the effect of
	      paralysing the administrative process or where
	      the  need	 for promptitude or the	 urgency  of
	      taking  action so demands, as pointed  out  in
	      Meneka Gandhi's [1978] 2 SCR 621 cases."
In the instant cases statutory Regulations do not  expressly
or  by implication apply the rule of audi alteram partem  in
making the selection. On the other hand the scheme contained
under  the  regulations	 exclude the  applicability  of	 the
aforesaid rule by implication. Select list is prepared	each
year  which ordinarily continues to be effective for a	year
or  till  the fresh select list is prepared. If	 during	 the
process of
551
selection  a senior officer is proposed to be superseded  by
virtue	of  not being included in the select  list,  and  if
opportunity  is afforded to him to make	 representation	 and
only thereafter the list is finalised, the process would  be
cumbersome  and time consuming. In this process it  will  be
difficult  for	the committee to prepare  and  finalise	 the
select list within a reasonable period of time and the	very
purpose	 of  preparing the select list	would  be  defeated.
Scheme of the Regulations therefore clearly warrants  exclu-
sion  of principle of audi alteram partem. No  vested  legal
right of a member of the State Civil Service who after being
considered, is not included in the select list, is adversely
affected,  Non-inclusion  in the select list does  not	take
away  any right of a member of the State Civil Service	that
may  have  accrued to him as a Govt. servant,  therefore  no
opportunity  is necessary to be afforded to him	 for  making
representation against the proposed supersession.
    The	 next submission was that the select  list  prepared
for  1978 was vitiated for the non-compliance of  Regulation
6(iii) inasmuch as the State Govt. failed to forward to	 the
Commission  reasons recorded by the Committee for  superses-
sion of seniors as required by that Regulation. It was urged
that  even after deletion of Regulation 5(5) which  required
Committee  to record reasons for supersession of an  officer
by  the Notification dated June 3, 1977,  Regulation  6(iii)
remained  unamended,  therefore, the Committee was  under  a
mandatory  duty to record reasons, and the State  Govt.	 was
required  to forward the same to the Commission.  Since	 the
Committee  failed to comply with the  mandatory	 obligation,
the  select list prepared for the year 1978 stood  vitiated.
To support this submission reliance was placed on the  deci-
sion of this Court in Chothia's case. In that case interpre-
tation	of Regulation 5 of the Indian Forests Service  (Ini-
tial Recruitment) Regulation of 1966 came up for  considera-
tion. Regulation 5 laid down method for preparation of	list
of suitable officers of State Forest Service adjudged by the
Selection  Board for appointment to posts in the senior	 and
junior scales of Indian Forest Service. Regulation 5(2)	 was
as under:
	      "5(2):  The list prepared in  accordance	with
	      sub-regulation  (1) shall then be referred  to
	      the  Commission  for advice,  by	the  Central
	      Govt. alongwith--
	      (a)  the	records	 of all	 officers  of  State
	      Forest Service included in the list;
	      (b) the records of all other eligible officers
	      of the State
	      552
	      Forest  Service who are not adjudged  suitable
	      for  inclusion in the list, together with	 the
	      reasons  as  recorded by the Board  for  their
	      non-inclusion in the list."
    Construing the aforesaid regulation this Court held that
both  the clauses (a) and (b) of Regulation 5 must  be	com-
plied  with before the recommendations are sent tO the	Com-
mission. Clause (b) of the Regulation 5 laid down that where
eligible officers of the State Forest Service were not found
suitable, reasons must be given by the Board for their	non-
inclusion in the select list. The Court held that Regulation
5(b) which provided for recording reasons was mandatory	 and
it must be complied with. But in view of the amendments made
in  Regulations under consideration providing for  selection
on the basis of categorisation of members of the State Civil
Service into different categories on the assessment of their
service records, principles laid down in Chothia's case	 are
not  applicable.  After the amendment of  Regulation  5	 the
Committee  was under no legal obligation to  record  reasons
for supersession of a senior officer and for that reason  it
did  not  record  any reasons, therefore,  the	question  of
forwarding  any reasons by the State Government to the	Com-
mission did not arise. Regulation 6(iii) which required	 the
State  Government  to forward to the Commission	 along	with
reasons as recorded by the Committee for the proposed super-
session	 of any member of the State Civil Service  was	con-
sistent	 with the unamended Regulation 5(5)  which  required
the Committee to record reasons for supersession of a member
of the State Civil Service. By Notification No.	 11039/3/78-
AIS(1)	dated June 2, 1979 Clause (iii) of Regulation 6	 was
deleted	 as a result of which the State Govt. ceased to	 the
under  any obligation to forward to the	 Commission  reasons
recorded  by  the Committee for	 supersession  of  officers.
Having regard to the legislative history and the purpose and
the object which was sought to be achieved by the amendments
there could be no mandatory legal obligation on the  Commit-
tee to record reasons. Regulation 6(iii) merely required the
State Govt. to forward reasons if recorded for	supersession
of  the officers to the Commission, but if no  reasons	were
recorded  the State Govt. was under no legal  obligation  to
forward	 the same to the Commission and	 its  non-compliance
did not vitiate the select list. Since the entire system  of
selection  has been changed on account of amendment  in	 the
regulations,  the principles laid down in Chothia's case  do
not  apply  to the instant cases. The  Madhya  Pradesh	High
Court in P.C. Pradhan v. Union of India & Ors., [1981] 1 SLR
1  and	the Punjab and Haryana High Court in  J.S.  Chopra's
[1980] 2 ILR Punj. 477 case have taken similar views.
553
    The	 Appellants/Petitioners	 entertain  an	apprehension
that  in the absence of reasons the selection would be	made
in  an arbitrary manner over-looking the claim of  a  senior
officer eligible for promotion to the Indian  Administrative
Service. In this regard it was urged that selection on merit
confers	 wide discretion on the authority  making  selection
and in the absence of reasons there would be no	 objectivity
and  the  members of the State Civil Service  would  receive
discriminatory	treatment by the committee. The scheme	con-
tained in promotion regulations and the criteria  prescribed
therein	 for  preparing the select list do not	justify	 any
such  apprehension.  The principal object of  the  promotion
system as contained in the regulations is to secure the best
possible incumbents for promotion to the Indian	 Administra-
tive  Service which is the back-bone of	 the  administrative
machinery of the country. The efficiency of the	 administra-
tion  in the Union as well as in the State  largely  depends
upon the efficiency of the members of the Indian Administra-
tive Service. Efficient public service is in public interest
and the public interest is best secured if reasonable oppor-
tunity for promotion exist for all qualified members of	 the
State  Civil Service and only those who are found  efficient
and  suitable in all respects are promoted. This  object  is
sought	to  be achieved by the	Regulations  in	 prescribing
merit as the sole test for promotion. In order to judge	 the
merit the regulations provide for categorisation of eligible
members	 of  the State Civil Service on the basis  of  their
service	 records  which	 are scrutinised  by  the  Committee
consisting  of high ranking officers of the State Govt.	 and
the Central Govt. The service records of all eligible  offi-
cers  whose names are included in the proposed	select	list
and the records of even those who are not selected is  again
scrutinised by the State Govt. and the Union Public  Service
Commission  and only thereafter final shape is given to	 the
selection  list. There are, therefore, adequate	 checks	 and
safeguards at different stages by different authorities. But
if any dispute arise with regard to the arbitrary  exclusion
of  a  senior  member of the State Service  the	 matter	 can
always	be investigated by perusing his service records	 and
comparing  the same with the service record of officers	 who
may  have been preferred and that would	 certainly  disclose
the  reasons for the supersession of the senior officer.  It
is  true that where merit is the sole basis  for  promotion,
the power of selection becomes wide and liable to be  abused
with less difficulty, But that does not justify	 presumption
regarding  arbitrary  exercise of power. The  machinery	 de-
signed for preparation of select list under the	 regulations
for  promotion to All India Service, ensures  objective	 and
impartial  selection. The Selection Commitee is	 constituted
by high ranking responsible officers presided over by Chair-
man or a Member of the Union Public Service Commission.
554
There  is no reason to hold that they would not act in	fair
and  impartial manner in making selection.  The	 recommenda-
tions  of  the selection committee are	scrutinised  by	 the
State Govt. and if it finds any discrimination in the selec-
tion it has power to refer the matter to the Commission with
its recommendations. The Commission is under a legal obliga-
tion  to  consider the views expressed by  the	State  Govt.
along  with  the records of officers, before  approving	 the
select list. The selection committee and the Commission both
include	 persons having requisite knowledge, experience	 and
expertise  to  assess  the service records  and	 ability  to
adjudge the suitability of officers. In this view we find no
good  reasons  to hold that in the absence  of	reasons	 the
selection  would be made arbitrarily. Where power is  vested
in high authority there is a presumption that the same would
be exercised in a reasonable manner and if the selection  is
made  on extraneous considerations, in arbitrary manner	 the
courts have ample power to strike down the same and that  is
an  adequate  safeguard against the  arbitrary	exercise  of
power.
    It	was  urged that the selection merely  based  on	 the
appraisal of service record is arbitrary and it is bound  to
cause injustice as entries in the character roll of  members
of the State Service depend upon the whims of the  recording
officer. It is true that the service records contain remarks
which  sometimes  may not be fully justified, but  for	that
reason the scheme contained in the rules and regulations for
promotion  cannot be characterised unreasonable.  There	 are
various methods of selection viz. by competitive examination
written	 test-cum-vivavoice,  or by  assessment	 of  service
records. For the purpose of recruitment to the Indian Admin-
istrative  Service  from amongst the officers of  the  State
Civil Service, latter method namely, selection on the  basis
of scrutiny of service records has been accepted. This is  a
well recognised system for making selection. In Parvez Qadir
v. Union of India & Ors., [1975] 2 SCR 432 while considering
similar submission the Court observed:
	      "The past performance of an officer being	 one
	      of the criteria for making selection, the only
	      way to adjudge their suitability is by perusal
	      of  confidential	records.  It  is  true	that
	      confidential  records do not sometimes give  a
	      true  picture due to the vagaries of  the	 re-
	      cording  officer.	 The human  fallibility	 and
	      want  of objectivity in the  superior  officer
	      are  factors which cannot be eliminated  alto-
	      gether.  For  that  matter one  can  ask	what
	      method  is perfect. For this  reason,  certain
	      safeguards have been provided in order
	      555
	      to  make	them as objective  as  possible.  If
	      there is an adverse entry against any  officer
	      that  officer is given an opportunity  to	 ex-
	      plain.  After the. explanation is	 given,	 the
	      superior	officer as well as the	Govt.  ulti-
	      mately  decide  whether that  remarks  by	 the
	      recording officer was justified or not, and if
	      it is not justified the Govt. can always order
	      its deletion. Sometimes vagary may enter	into
	      the  service confidentials, and if  cannot  be
	      postulated that all superior officers who have
	      been  empowered to finalise such entries	will
	      suffer  from any of those traits	because	 the
	      actions of the officer concerned may not	have
	      any immediate impact upon him and consequently
	      his sense of objectivity will not be dimmed or
	      strained.	 In  our  view,	 often	enough,	 the
	      entries in confidential records are themselves
	      an insignia of the capacity and capability  of
	      the  maker as a superior officer as well as  a
	      commentary  on  the  quality  of	the  officer
	      against whom that confidential remark is being
	      noted. But those who are charged with the duty
	      to over see that these entries are fair,	just
	      and  objective  quite often do  intervene	 and
	      rectify any entry on representation being made
	      against  it.  at	the proper  time.  In  these
	      circumstances, we do not think that the method
	      of  selection  based on  past  performance  as
	      disclosed	 by the confidential records is	 not
	      the proper method for adjudging suitability of
	      the officer concerned."
    An ancillary argument was raised to demonstrate discrim-
ination.  It was urged that the regulations do not lay	down
any  guidelines for categorisation of officers of the  State
Service into various categories with the result the  Commit-
tee  even if acting bona fide may apply different  standards
at different times. The argument was further developed	that
the  Committee members change and, therefore, the same	Com-
mittee	or  different Committee is likely to apply  its	 own
standard in judging the suitability of officers in different
manner in different years which would result into  discrimi-
nation.	 This submission is rounded on the  assumption	that
the  Committee is free to categorise officers at  its  sweet
will but that assumption is misconceived. Under Regulation 5
the  Committee	has to categorise officers on the  basis  of
their  service	records into four  categories  as  discussed
earlier.  The  categorisation  is objectively  made  on	 the
material  available in the service records of the  officers.
There  is hardly any scope for applying different  standards
or criteria at different times as the service records namely
the  character roll entries would indicate the	category  of
the officers as adjudged by the authority 'recording  annual
confidential remarks. There is no dis-
556
pure that in Punjab, under the State Govt's instruction	 the
authority competent to record annual remarks in the  charac-
ter  roll  of members of the State Civil Service,  has	been
directed  to  indicate	the category of	 the  officer,	e.g.
whether the officer is "outstanding". "very good" or "good".
The annual confidential remarks as available in the  charac-
ter  roll of officers of the State Civil  Service  therefore
indicate  the  category to which a  particular	officer	 may
belong.	 We  were informed by Counsel for  the	Union  Govt.
during	the  hearing of the cases  that	 under	instructions
issued by the Union Govt. all the State Govts. are following
similar	 pattern in categorising members of the State  Civil
Service	 in  the annual remarks made in	 their	confidential
records.  This has brought uniformity in the character	roll
entries. Since category of members of State Civil Service is
available  in  their service record, the  Committee  has  no
discretion  to	disregard  the same. The  Committee  has  to
categorise the members of the State Service on the basis  of
entries available in their character roll and thereafter  to
arrange their names in the proposed list in accordance	with
the principles laid down in Regulation 5. There is no  scope
for  applying  different standard or test in  preparing	 the
list, or to practice discrimination. We, therefore, find  no
merit in the submission that Regulation 3 and 5 are discrim-
inatory and they violate Article 14 and 16 of the  Constitu-
tion.
    Learned counsel urged that recommendations of the Selec-
tion  Committee which prepared the select list for the	year
1979  was  illegal on account of the participation  of	Shri
I.C.  Puff,  as he was not entitled to be a  member  of	 the
Selection  Committee, his participation in the	deliberation
of the committee was unauthorised. Regulation 3(1)  provides
that  a	 committee shall be constituted, consisting  of	 the
Chairman  of the Commission or any other member of the	Com-
mission	 representing it and other members as  specified  in
corresponding  column 3 of the schedule. The proviso to	 the
Regulation lays down that except the Chairman or the  member
of  the Commission, no other person who is not a  member  of
the  service  shall be member of the Committee.	 It  further
provides that the Central Govt. may after consultation	with
the  State Government amend the schedule. Other	 members  of
the  Committee as specified in Column 3 of the	schedule  to
the  regulation as applicable to the State of Punjab  speci-
fied  the (1) Chief Secretary to the Govt.; (2)	 Development
Commissioner  (3) Senior most Financial Commissioner, (4)  A
nominee	 of the Govt. of India, not below the rank of  Joint
Secretary as members of the Committee.
     Senior  posts in the Indian Administrative Service	 not
below the rank of Commissioner are determined in  accordance
with the schedule
557
to  the Indian Administrative Service. (Fixation  of  Cadres
Strength)  Regulations	1954. The cadre regulation  did	 not
provide	 for  any post of Development Commissioner  for	 the
State  of Punjab as a result of which there was no  separate
post  of  Development Commissioner. Instead,  the  Financial
Commissioner was made Incharge of the Development Department
and  he was designated as Financial  Commissioner  (Develop-
ment).	Shri I.C. Puri who was posted as the Financial	Com-
missioner  (Development)  was the  Incharge  of	 Development
Department at the relevant time and as such he was appointed
a  member of the Selection Committee and admittedly he	par-
ticipated  in the deliberations of the	Selection  Committee
which held its deliberation on November 30, 1979 for prepar-
ing  the  select  list of 1979. In the	affidavit  filed  on
behalf of the State of Punjab it has been asserted that	 the
Development Department was under the charge of the Financial
Commissioner  who was designated as  Financial	Commissioner
(Development)  and Shri Pun who was holding the rank of	 the
Commissioner  was the Secretary Incharge of the	 Development
Department.
    On	behalf of the Appellants/Petitioners it was  strenu-
ously urged that Shri Puri was not the Secretary Incharge of
the  Development  Department on 30.11.79.  Instead  Hardayal
Singh was Incharge of the Development Department as  Special
Secretary  in the Department of Rural Development,  Panchay-
ats, Agriculture and Forests. In the counter affidavit filed
on  behalf of the State Govt. it is asserted  that  Hardayal
Singh  was merely posted Special Secretary to the  Govt.  He
was neither holding the rank of Commissioner nor he was	 the
Secretary  Incharge of the Development Department.  However,
Hardayal  Singh	 was given the rank of Secretary  simply  to
protect his special pay in the time scale of selection grade
in the Indian Administrative Service. He was not Incharge of
the  Department as Secretary, instead he was  working  under
over  all  control of Financial	 Commissioner  (Development)
namely,	 Shri  I.C. Puff. This finds support from  the	note
recorded  by Hardayal Singh on 5.12.79 requesting the  Chief
Secretary  for	allocation  of work  between  the  Financial
Commissioner (Development) and Special Secretary. The  rele-
vant  note is available on record. It is thus  evident	that
Hardayal  Singh	 was working under the over all	 control  of
Shri I.C. Puri who was the Financial Commissioner  (Develop-
ment) and Secretary Incharge of Development Department.	 The
material placed on record leaves no room for any doubt	that
Shri I.C. Puri designated as Financial Commissioner  (Devel-
opment) was also discharging the duties and functions of the
Development  Commissioner.  He was, therefore,	holding	 the
dual
558
charge	as no separate post of Development Commissioner	 had
been  sanctioned by the Govt. These facts clearly show	that
for all purposes Shri Pun was working as Development Commis-
sioner.	 As  Financial	Commissioner  (Development)  he	 was
exercising same powers and discharging same functions  which
could be performed by a Development Commissioner,  therefore
he was competent to participate in the deliberations of	 the
selection  committee.  While considering  this	question  we
cannot be oblivious of the fact that at no stage any  objec-
tion was raised against functioning of Shri Puri as a member
of  the	 Selection  Committee or his  participation  in	 the
deliberations. There is further no allegations of mala	fide
or  bias against Shri Puff. There is evidence on  record  to
show that recommendations of the Selection Committee consti-
tuted under Regulation 3 were unanimous, which were  scruti-
nised  by the State Govt. and the Union Public Service	Com-
missions before the same were approved.
    Learned  Counsel placed strong reliance on the  decision
of  this Court in A.K. Kraipak's case. In that case  initial
recruitment to the Indian Forest Service was challenged.  In
pursuance of the Indian Forest Service (Initial Recruitment)
Regulations, 1966 a special Selection Board was	 constituted
for Selecting officers for appointment to the Indian  Forest
Service, from officers of the forest department of the State
of  Jammu and Kashmir. The Acting Chief Conservator of	For-
ests  of the State was a member of the	Selection  Committee
which made recommendations for the recruitment, he  partici-
pated  in the selection board's deliberations  in  preparing
the  list  of selected candidates in  order  of	 preference,
although  he  himself was a candidate  for  selection."	 The
Court  held that the participation of the Acting Chief	Con-
servator vitiated the recommendations made by the  Selection
Board  as there was conflict between the, Acting Chief	Con-
servator's personal interest and his duty and further he was
a Judge in his own cause. The Court further held that taking
into consideration probability and ordinary course of  human
conduct, there was reasonable ground for believing that	 the
Acting Chief Conservator was likely to have been biased.  In
these  circumstances the Court held that the selection	made
by  the	 Board could 'not be considered to  have  been	made
fairly	and justly as it was influenced by a member who	 was
biased. Principles laid down in Kraipak's case do not effect
the validity of the recommendations made for the preparation
of select list of 1979 as Shri I.C. Puff was neither  biased
against	 any  of the appellants/petitioners, nor  there	 was
conflict  between his personal interest and duty. Shri	Puri
had no interest in the inclusion or exclusion of a member of
the State Civil Service nor he had any personal interest  in
preparing the
559
list. There is no allegation of bias or malice against	Shri
Puff,  his  participation in the meeting  of  the  Selection
Committee did not render the select list of 1979 illegal.
    Shri  B.S. Khoji, learned counsel for Pritam  Singh	 and
other petitioners in the writ petitions urged that Promotion
Regulations 3, 5 and 7 are ultra vires rule 8 and the entire
selection made in pursuance of the impugned Regulations	 are
illegal.  Rule 8(1) provides that the Central Govt.  may  on
the recommendations of the State Government and in consulta-
tion with the Commission and in accordance with such Regula-
tions as the Central Govt. may frame after consultation with
the  State  Governments and the Commission, recruit  to	 the
Indian	Administrative	Service persons	 by  promotion	from
amongst	 the  substantive members of  State  Civil  Service.
According to the learned counsel, Rule 8(1) confers power on
the Central Govt. to make recruitment to the Indian Adminis-
trative Service by promotion from amongst the members of the
State  Civil  Service on the recommendations  of  the  State
Govt., in consultation with the Commission. However, Regula-
tions 3, 5 and 7 rob the State Govt. of its power of  making
recommendation	for recruitment to the service. The plea  of
ultra  vires can be sustained if Regulations 3, 5 and 7	 are
inconsistent  with Rule 8(1). In our opinion Rule 8(1)	con-
fers  power on the Central Govt. to make recruitment to	 the
Indian Administrative Service by promotion from amongst	 the
members of the State Civil Service on the recommendations of
the  State  Govt. in consultation with	the  Commission.  It
further	 contemplates that the recommendations of the  State
Govt. and consultation with the Commission which is  consti-
tutional obligation as envisaged by Art. 320 of the  Consti-
tution,	 would be in accordance with regulations  which	 the
Central	 Govt. may frame after consultation with  the  State
Govt. and Commission. Rule 8(1), therefore, contemplates the
State  Govt's.	recommendation and the consultation  of	 the
Commission in accordance with the regulations framed by	 the
Central Govt. The Central Govt. has framed promotion regula-
tions which provide method and manner of selection.  Regula-
tion  3 provides for constitution of selection committee  to
prepare list of suitable officers in accordance with Regula-
tion 5. The list so prepared is forwarded by the State Govt.
to  the Union Public Service Commission along  with  records
and  the observations of the State Govt. in accordance	with
Regulation  6. Thereafter the Commission considers the	list
under  Regulation 7. The Commission may make any  change  in
the list received from the State Govt. and thereafter it may
approve finally with such modification as in its opinion  it
may be just and proper. The list as finally approved by	 the
Commission forms the select list of
560
members	 of State Civil Service which ordinarily remains  in
force until its review and revision. Regulation 9 lays	down
that the appointment of members of State Civil Service shall
be  made by the Central Govt. on the recommendations of	 the
State Govt. in the order in which their names appear in	 the
select list. In our opinion these regulations do not in	 any
manner	impinge upon the powers of the State Govt.  to	make
recommendations to the Central Govt. as contemplated by Rule
8. There is, therefore, no merit in the petitioners' submis-
sion.
    On behalf of Pritam Singh, Petitioner, it was urged that
the State Government acted mala fide in deliberately  delay-
ing  its comments to the Commission on the list of 1980	 and
thereby	 it manipulated appointment of Tejinder Singh,	M.P.
Mitra and Gurdev Singh. In' order to appreciate this submis-
sion  it  is necessary to refer to the facts which  are	 not
disputed. The names of Tejinder Singh, M.P. Mitra and  Guru-
dev Singh were included in the select list approved for	 the
year  1979,  and  as such they were  entitled  to  promotion
during the period of currency of that list. On December	 31,
1980 Selection Committee constituted under Regulation 3	 met
to prepare fresh select list for the year 1980. The list  so
prepared  did not include the names of	aforesaid  officers.
But  before the 1980 list could be finally approved  by	 the
Commission,  the  aforesaid officers were  promoted  and.ap-
pointed	 to I.A.S. In the background of these facts  it	 was
urged that the State Government deliberately did not forward
its  comments.to the Union Public Service Commission on	 the
proposed Select List of 1980 as a result of which, delay was
caused	in  the approval of the 1980 list.  In	the  counter
affidavit  filed on behalf of the State	 Government  allega-
tions regarding mala fide have been denied. No material	 has
been placed before us to substantiate the plea of mala fide.
Merely, because the State Government forwarded its recommen-
dations	 with delay is not sufficient to  justify  inference
that  the  delay was purposive with a view  to	grant  undue
favour to the officers named above. Regulations	 contemplate
preparation of select list each year. The process of  Selec-
tion, preparation and its final approval involves participa-
tion  of  three authorities namely the	Selection  Committee
constituted under Regulation 3, the State Government and the
Union  Public  Service Commission. The records	of  all	 the
eligible  officers are scrutinized by the  Committee,  State
Government  and	 the Commission before the  Select  List  is
finally approved and if there is any difference between	 the
authorities,  consultation between the State Govt.  and	 the
Commission  is	bound to take place. These steps  which	 are
necessary  for the approval of select list are time  consum-
ing.  In actual practice sometimes delay may be	 inevitable.
As the select list is to be prepared each year the State
561
Government  should take action well in advance to avoid	 any
delay.	If  undue delay is caused in preparation  of  select
list, it provides occasion for suspicion against the author-
ities  and  it is likely to generate frustration  and  heart
burning	 among the members of the State Civil Service  which
would obviously be detrimental to public administration. The
select	list  of 1979 which included the names	of  Tejinder
Singh, M.P. Mitra and Gurdev Singh continued to be effective
under  Regulation  7(4)	 till another select  list  for	 the
subsequent  year was finally approved. There is	 no  dispute
that  the aforesaid officers were promoted and appointed  to
I.A.S.	before the approval of the select list for the	year
1980. Therefore no exception can be taken to the validity of
their appointment. We are, further of the opinion that delay
made  by the State Government in forwarding its comments  to
the Union Public Service Commission with regard to the	1980
list  did not cause any prejudice to Pritam Singh and  other
petitioners  as none of them was selected for  inclusion  in
the 1980 list.
    We, therefore, find no merit in the appeals and the writ
petitions. They are accordingly dismissed but there will  be
no order as to costs.
A.P.J.				    Appeals  and   Petitions
dismissed.
563




