

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Hindustan Paper Corporation Ltd vs Government Of Kerala & Others on 16 April, 1986Equivalent citations: 1986 AIR 1541, 1986 SCR  (2) 581
Author: E Venkataramiah
Bench: Venkataramiah, E.S. (J)
           PETITIONER:
HINDUSTAN PAPER CORPORATION LTD.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
GOVERNMENT OF KERALA & OTHERS

DATE OF JUDGMENT16/04/1986

BENCH:
VENKATARAMIAH, E.S. (J)
BENCH:
VENKATARAMIAH, E.S. (J)
THAKKAR, M.P. (J)

CITATION:
 1986 AIR 1541		  1986 SCR  (2) 581
 1986 SCC  (3) 398	  1986 SCALE  (1)870
 CITATOR INFO :
 R	    1989 SC 903	 (20)


ACT:
     Constitution  of	India,	1950   -  Article  19(6)(ii)
Government  owned   industry  -	  Necessity  for   grant  OF
concessions.
     Kerala Forest  Produce (Fixation of Selling Price) Act,
1978 -	Section 6  - Constitutional  validity of - Action of
State  Government   exempting  Government   companies	from
operation of section 5 of the Act - Whether valid and legal.



HEADNOTE:
     The Kerala	 Forest Produce	 (Fixation of Selling Price)
Act, 1978  was enacted	with the object of providing for the
procedure to  be followed  in fixing  the selling  prices of
certain important forest produce, for the prohibition of the
sale of such forest produce at less than the prices so fixed
and for	 matters incidental  or ancillary  thereto. The	 Act
governs only those forests which are considered as "reserved
forests" within	 the meaning of Kerala Forests Act, 1961 and
forests vested	in the	Government under  s. 3 of the Kerala
Private Forests (Vesting and Assignment) Act 1971.
     Section 6	provides that  the Government  may in public
interest, by Notification in the Gazette, exempt the sale of
any forest  produce (a)	 to any company owned by the Central
Government  or	 the  Government  of  Kerala,  and  (b)	 not
exceeding 10  cubic  meters,  to  any  co-operative  society
registered or  deemed to  be registered under the Kerala Co-
operative Societies  Act, 1969	from the  provisions of s. 5
subject to  such  conditions  and  restrictions	 as  may  be
specified in the Notification.
     On	 March	9,  1979,  the	respondent-State  Government
published a  Notification exempting  the  appellant-company,
the Kerala  State Bamboo Corporation Ltd. and the Travancore
Private Industries Ltd. from the provisions of s.5 and fixed
the price  below which	forest produce	covered by  the	 Act
could not be sold.
582
     Two private sector companies filed writ petitions under
Art. 226  questioning the constitutional validity of s.6 and
the  Notification   granting  exemption	 in  favour  of	 the
appellant-company and  two Government  owned companies.	 The
petitions were	opposed alleging  that s.6  of the  Act	 was
constitutionally valid. At the hearing of the petitions, the
Additional Advocate-General  appearing for  the	 respondent-
State  Government   conceded  that  s.	6  of  the  Act	 was
unconstitutional. The  High Court, therefore, held that s. 6
of the Act was violative of Art. 14 and struck down the same
as well as the Notification.
      The appellant-company filed appeals to this Court.
Though no  appeal was  filed by the State Government, at the
hearing the  counsel for  respondent-State Government stated
that the concession made by the counsel for the State before
the High  Court, was incorrect and supported the validity of
s.6 of the Act and the Notification granting exemption.
     Allowing the appeals,
^
     HELD: 1.  The decision  of the  High Court that s. 6 of
the Kerala  Forest Produce  (Fixation of Selling Price) Act,
1978 was  violative of Art. 14 of the Constitution is liable
to be set aside. [595 C]
     2. Section	 6 of the Act confers the power on the State
Government to grant exemption from the provisions of s. 5 of
the Act.  The power  conferred under s. 6 is not unfettered.
The Government	can grant  the exemption  only in the public
interest. Such	exemption can  be granted  only to a company
owned by the Central Government or the Government of Kerala.
[590 D-E]
     3. Under  cl. (b) of s.6 any sale of forest produce not
exceeding 10  cubic meters  effected in	 favour of  any	 co-
operative society  registered or  deemed  to  be  registered
under the  Kerala Co-operative	Societies Act  1969  may  be
exempted from  s. 5 of the Act by the State Government. [590
E]
     4. While issuing the notification granting exemption it
is open	 to  the  State	 Government  to	 impose	 appropriate
conditions and	restrictions. The  State Government  has  to
bear in	 mind the  entire policy  and the  object of the Act
before exercising its power under s. 6. [590 F-G]
583
     5. So  far as consumers of forest produce who are not A
granted any  exemption under  s.6 are  concerned any sale of
forest produce in their favour cannot be effected at a price
less than  the price  notified under  s. 3  of the  Act. The
notified  price	 has  to  be  fixed  on	 the  basis  of	 the
recommendation of the Expert Committee constituted under s.4
and  the   Expert  Committee   is  required   to  take	into
consideration the  market price	 of the	 forest produce, the
cost of	 regenerating and  maintaining the forest produce in
cases where  regeneration is  necessary	 after	selling	 the
forest	produce	  and  such   other  materials	 as  may  be
prescribed. Section  5	provides  that	the  forest  produce
covered by  the Act  shall not	be sold at a price less than
the price  which is  determined	 on  the  basis	 of  various
factors, therefore, the consumers cannot have any grievance.
They cannot claim that they must be shown any concession and
that the  forest produce should be made available to them at
a price	 which would  be lower	than the market prices. Even
when it	 is stated  that any  company owned  by the  Central
Government or  the Government  of Kerala  or a	co-operative
society	 may   be  supplied   forest  produce	without	 the
constraint contained  in s.5,  it does	not  mean  that	 the
forest produce would be made available to them at throw-away
prices. It  is reasonable  to expect  that the price payable
for  the  forest  produce  in  question	 by  the  Government
companies or  co-operative  societies  would  be  determined
after negotiations  having regard  to the  public  interest.
[591 F-H; 592 A-C] E
     6. In  almost all	the statutes  by which the fiscal or
economic interests  of the State are regulated provision for
granting  exemption   in  appropriate	cases	would	have
necessarily to	be there and the power to grant exemption is
invariably conferred on the Government concerned. [592 C-D]
     7.	 It   has   now	  become   a   well-recognised	 and
constitutionally   accepted    legislative    practice	  to
incorporate provisions conferring the powers of exemption on
the Government	in such	 statutes.  Such  exemptions  cannot
ordinarily be granted secretly. A Notification would have to
be issued  and published  in the  Gazette and  it  would  be
subject to the scrutiny by the Legislature. The power can be
exercised only	in the	public interest	 as provided  by the
section itself.	 The validity  of provisions  conferring the
power of  exemption has	 been consistently  upheld  by	this
Court. [592 E-F]
584
     State of  Bombay and  Another v.  F.N.  Balsara  [1951]
S.C.R. 682, relied upon.
     8. The  Government undertakings  and companies  form  a
class by  themselves since  any profit	that they  may	make
would in the end result in the benefit to the members of the
general public.	 The profit,  if any,  enriches	 the  public
coffer and not the private coffer. The role of industries in
the public  sector is  very sensitive  and critical from the
point of view of national economy. Their survival very often
depends upon  the budgetary  provision and  not upon private
resources which	 are available	to  the	 industries  in	 the
private sector.	 They are  often established  to  break	 the
power of  strangulation on  economy which  the industries in
private sector	may have developed and may be using to choke
the industrial	growth of  the country.	 An exemption  or  a
concession  might   provide  them  some	 breathing  time  or
settling down  time. It	 may be	 treated as a subsidy at the
worst.	This   appears	to  be	the  policy  behind  Article
19(6)(ii) of the Constitution. In appropriate cases in order
to place  an industry owned by the Government on an enduring
basis in  the national interest, some concession may have to
be shown to it. [592 H; 593 A-D]
     9. The  action of the State Government in exempting the
Government Companies  from the	operation of 8.5 does not in
the instant  case amount  to the exclusion of the industries
in the	private sector	from their business nor does it deny
the usual  supplies of	forest produce used as raw-materials
by these  industries. The  Government is  not  shown  to  be
taking any  undue advantage of the monopoly it enjoys as the
owner of  the forests  and the position it holds as the sole
supplier in  forest produce  in fixing the minimum prices in
order to  preserve the	national wealth	 from  being  wasted
away. There  fore, it  cannot be  said that the provision is
either arbitrary  or unreasonable even though the Government
industries may	be rivals  in trade to the industries in the
private sector. [593 E-G]
     Sher Singh v. Union of India & Ors., [1984] 1 S.C.R.
464; Viklad  Coal Merchant, Patiala & Ors. v. Union of India
Ors., [1984] 1 S.C.R. 657 and Fatehchand Himmatlal & Ors. v.
State of Maharashtra etc., [1977] 2 S.C.R. 828, relied upon.
     State of  Rajasthan v.  Mukanchand	 &  Ors.,  [1964]  6
S.C.R. 903, referred to.
585
     10. Preference shown to Government companies under 8. 6
A of  the Act  cannot be  considered to be discriminatory as
they  stand   in  a   different	 class	altogether  and	 the
classification made  between the  Government  companies	 and
others for  the purposes  of the Act is a valid one. Same is
the case  with the  class which gives power under 8.6 of the
Act to	the Government	to exempt sales of forest produce in
favour of  co-operative societies  upto the  limit mentioned
therein. [594 E-F]
     P.V. Sivarajan  v. The  Union of India and Anr., [1959]
Suppl. 1 S.C.R. 779 and Orient Weaving Mills (P) Ltd. v. The
Union of India, [1962] Suppl. 3 S.C.R. 481, relied upon.
     11. In  the instant  case, the writ petitioners on whom
the burden  lay have not given any valid reason as to why it
should be  held that  impugned notification  was not  in the
public interest.  In the  absence of  material it  cannot be
held that  the impugned	 notification was  not in the public
interest. [595 C-D]



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION : Civil Appeal No. 1871-76
of 1981.
     From the  Judgment and  Order dated  15.4.1981  of	 the
Kerala High  Court in  O.P. Nos.  6, 7,	 l005 1153, 1154 and
1345 of 1981. E
     Dr.  Y.S.	 Chitale,  M.	Ramchandran,   Mrs.   Shanta
Vasudevan,  P.	 Parameswaran  and   A.S.  Nambiar  for	 the
Appellant.
     T.S.  Krishnamurthy   Iyer	 and  P.K.  Pillai  for	 the
Respondents. F
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     VENKATARAMIAH J.  In these	 appeals by special leave we
are concerned  with the	 question of constitutional validity
of section  6 of  the Kerala  Forest  Produce  (Fixation  of
Selling Price)	Act, 1978  (Act	 29  of	 1978)	(hereinafter
referred to as 'the Act')
     The appellant  Hindustan Paper  Corporation Ltd.  is  a
company owned by the Central Government carrying on the
586
business of  manufacturing newsprint  at its  factory in the
State of  Kerala. Before  its  factory	was  established  an
agreement was  entered into  between the appellant Hindustan
Paper Corporation  Ltd. and  the  Government  of  Kerala  on
October 7,  1974 under which the Government of Kerala agreed
to grant  to the  appellant the	 right of  free use of water
from the Muvattupuzha river for the purpose of manufacturing
newsprint  and	also  to  make	available  annually  to	 the
appellant 1,50,000 tonnes of eucalyptus wood. The Government
of Kerala  further agreed  to keep reserved from the date of
agreement the  State plantations  of eucalyptus	 grandis  in
Pamba, Kottayam,  Punalur, Thenmalai  and Trivandrum  Forest
Divisions as  constituted then	for the appellant and not to
permit harvesting  of eucalyptus  wood and  reeds  by  other
parties and for the regeneration of the forest in the areas,
the Chief  Conservator of Forests, Kerala State was required
in consultation	 with the appellant to prepare and implement
a   scientific	 management   plan   which   would   include
fireprotection	and   epidemic	 control   programmes.	 The
appellant agreed  to pay to the Government of Kerala royalty
for the	 raw materials supplied to the appellant at the rate
of Rs.11  per tonne  of green wood of eucalyptus grandis and
eucalyptus tereticornis (both with 50 per cent moisture) and
at the	rate of	 Rs.12 per  tonne of green reeds with 50 per
cent moisture.	There were  several other  conditions in the
agreement with which we are not concerned in these cases.
After the  above agreement  was entered	 into the  appellant
established its	 factory. The  Punalur Paper  Mills Ltd. and
the Gwalior  Rayon Silk	 Manufacturing (Wvg.) Co. Ltd. which
were companies	in the	private sector	had also established
their factories in the State of Kerala which consumed forest
produce as raw-material. The Kerala State Bamboo Corporation
Limited and  the Travancore Plywood Industries Limited which
were owned by the Government of Kerala were also carrying on
business in the State of Kerala.
     In the  year 1978	the Act	 was passed  by	 the  Kerala
Legislature with  the object  of providing for the procedure
to be  followed in  fixing the	selling	 prices	 of  certain
important forest produce, for the prohibition of the sale of
such forest produce at less than the prices so fixed and for
matters incidental  or ancillary  thereto. The	Act was also
intended  to   provide	for   the  proper  regeneration	 and
maintenance of	the forests  in the  State. The	 Act governs
only those forests which
587
are considered	as reserved  forests within the meaning of A
Rerala Forest Act, 1961 and forests vested in the Government
under section  3 of  the Kerala Private Forests (Vesting and
Assignment) Act,  1971. It provides for the determination of
the selling  price of  certain forest  produce specified  in
clause (c)  of section	2 of  the Act.	Section 3 of the Act
requires the  Government to notify in the Gazette before the
end of each financial year the selling price of every forest
produce for the following financial year. The notified price
has  to	 be  fixed  by	the  Government	 after	taking	into
consideration the  recommendations of  the Expert  Committee
consisting of  the officers mentioned in section 4(2) of the
Act. Sub-section  (3) of  section 4  of the Act requires the
Expert Committee  to make  its recommendation  having regard
inter alia  to the  market price  of the forest produce, the
cost of,  regenerating and maintaining the forest produce in
cases where  regeneration is  necessary	 after	selling	 the
forest produce; and such other matters as may be prescribed.
Section 5  is the  crucial section  in the  Act. It reads as
follows :
	  "5. Forest  produce to  be sold  at price not less
	  than the selling price -
	  (1) After  the date  of  the	publication  of	 the
	  notification under  sub-section (2)  of section 3,
	  no forest  produce shall be sold by the Government
	  or any  forest officer  at a	price which  is less
	  than the selling price of that forest produce.
	  (2)  The   sale   of	 any   forest	produce	  in
	  contravention of sub-section (1) shall be null and
	  void and  shall not  he enforceable  in a court of
	  law."
     There is  no prohibition  of sale	of forest produce at
prices higher than the prices mentioned in the notification.
Section 7 of the Act provides that 10 per cent of the amount
obtained  by   the  sale   of  forest	produce	 after	 the
commencement of	 the Act,  subject to  such rules  as may be
made under  the Act,  should be set apart for being utilised
for the	 development  of  forests.  Section  8	enables	 the
Government to  make rules  for the  purpose of carrying into
effect the  provisions of the Art. We are concerned in these
cases with  the validity of section 6 of the Act which reads
thus :
588
	  "6. Exemption	 - The Government may, in the public
	  interest, by	notification in	 the Gazette, exempt
	  the sale of any forest produce -
	  (a) to any company owned by the Central Government
	  or the Government of Kerala;
	  (b) not  exceeding ten  cubic meters,	 to any	 co-
	  operative  society  registered  or  deemed  to  be
	  registered under the Kerala Co-operative Societies
	  Act, 1969 (21 of 1969)
	  from the  provisions of section 5, subject to such
	  conditions and restrictions as may be specified in
	  the notification."
 The Act  came into	 force on  its publication, i.e., on
September 26,  1978. On	 March 9,  1979	 the  Government  of
Kerala published  a notification  exempting  the  appellant,
i.e., Hindustan	 Paper Corporation  Ltd., the  Kerala  State
Bamboo	Corporation   Limited  and  the	 Travancore  Plywood
Industries Limited  from the  provisions of section 5 of the
Act.  The   relevant  part   of	 the  Notification  and	 the
Explanatory Note attached to it are given below:
	  "No. G.O. (MS) lOO/79/AD Dated, Trivandrum
					  9th March, 1979
       S.R.O.	No.  313/79:-  In  exercise  of	 the  powers
conferred  by	section	 6  of	the  Kerala  Forest  Produce
(Fixation of  Selling Price)  Act, 1978	 (29 of	 1978),	 the
Government of  Kerala, being  satisfied that it is necessary
so to  do in  the public interest, hereby exempt the sale of
any forest produce to the Kerala Newsprint Project under the
Hindustan  Paper   Corporation,	 the   Kerala  State  Bamboo
Corporation and	 the Travancore	 Plywood Industries, Punalur
from the provisions of section 5 of the said Act.
				    By order of the Governor
					   K.V. Vidhyadharan
			       Additional Secretary to Govt.
589
		      EXPLANATORY NOTE
	  After Government  have notified  selling price  of
	  Forest Produce  under section 3 of Act 29 of 1978,
	  Forest Produce  cannot be sold at prices less than
	  the selling  price. Under  section 6	of the	Act,
	  Government  can  exempt  in  public  interest,  by
	  Notification, the  sale of  any Forest  Produce to
	  companies owned  by  the  Central  Government,  by
	  Government of Kerala. As Kerala Newsprint Project,
	  Bamboo Corporation  and  the	Tranvancore  Plywood
	  Industries,  Punalur	 are  undertakings   of	 the
	  Central Government  and the  Government of  Kerala
	  respectively, it is considered expedient to exempt
	  these from the provisions of section 5 of the Act.
	  The Notification  is intended to achieve the above
	  purpose."
     The State	Government  issued  the	 Notification  under
section 3  of the  Act fixing  the price  below which forest
produce covered	 by the	 Act could not be sold. Aggrieved by
the  Notification   granting  exemption	 to  the  Government
companies, the	two companies in the private sector, namely,
Punalur Paper  Mills Limited  and  the	Gwalior	 Rayon	Silk
Manufacturing (Wvg.)  Co. Ltd.	filed writ  petitions in the
High  Court   questioning  the	constitutional	validity  of
section 6 and the Notification granting exemption thereunder
in favour  of the appellant Hindustan Paper Corporation Ltd.
and two	 other companies  owned by the Government of Kerala.
The writ petitions were opposed by the Government of Kerala,
the appellant  Hindustan Paper	Corporation Ltd., the Kerala
State Bamboo  Corporation Ltd.	and the	 Tranvancore Plywood
Industries Ltd.	 In the counter-affidavit filed on behalf of
the Government	of  Kerala  the	 contentions  urged  by	 the
petitioners in the writ petitions were refuted and the State
Government took	 the stand  that section  6 of	the Act	 was
constitutionally valid. At the hearing of the writ petitions
before the  High Court,	 the Additional Advocate General who
appeared for  the State	 Government  conceded  that  in	 his
opinion section	 6 of  the Act was unconstitutional. Perhaps
what he	 meant was  that he  was not  able to offer any good
answer to the contentions urged by the other side in support
of the	challenge to  the constitutionality of the concerned
provision. A reference to
590
this concession which was neither here nor there is found at
the end	 of paragraph  22 of the judgment of the High Court.
The High  Court held that sec. 6 of the Act was violative of
Art. 14	 of the	 Constitution and  struck it down along with
the Notification. No appeal was filed by the State Govt. The
above appeals  are filed  by the Hindustan Paper Corporation
Ltd. the  appellant herein which is one of the beneficiaries
of the	Notification granting exemption. But, at the hearing
of these  appeals in  this Court the learned counsel for the
Government of  Kerala stated that the concession made by the
learned counsel	 for the  State before	the High  Court	 was
incorrect, and	supported the  validity of  section 6 of the
Act  and   the	Notification   granting	  exemption   issued
thereunder.
     These appeals  are filed  against the  judgment of	 the
High Court  after obtaining  the leave	of this	 Court under
Article 136  of the  Constitution. Section  6 of the Act has
already been  set out  above. It  confers the  power on	 the
State Government  to grant  exemption from the provisions of
section 5 of the Act. The power conferred under section 6 of
the Act	 is not	 unfettered. The  Government can  grant	 the
exemption only in the public interest. Such exemption can be
granted only to a company owned by the Central Government or
the  Government	  of  Kerala.  There  is  also,	 however,  a
provision in  clause (b)  of section  6 of  the	 Act,  which
ununderstandably has  also been	 struck	 down  by  the	High
Court, even  though its	 validity  has	not  been  expressly
challenged. Under  this provision any sale of forest produce
not exceeding ten cubic meters effected in favour of any co-
operative society  registered or  deemed  to  be  registered
under the  Kerala Co-operative	Societies Act,	1969 may  be
exempted from  section 5 of the Act by the State Government.
While issuing the notification granting exemption it is open
to the State Government to impose appropriate conditions and
restrictions. The  State Government,  of course, has to bear
in mind	 the entire  policy and	 object of  the	 Act  before
exercising its	power under  section 6	of the	Act. At	 the
outset it  should be  observed that the decision of the High
Court to  the extent  it has quashed clause (b) of section 6
of the	Act which  gave power  to the  State  Government  to
exempt the  sale of  any forest	 produce in small quantities
not exceeding 10 cubic meters to any co-operative society is
liable to be set aside straightaway without anything more as
there was  no challenge	 to that  part of the section at all
and the High Court has not
591
at all	scrutinized  the  constitutional  validity  of	this
provision.
     The reasons  given	 by  the  High	Court  for  quashing
section 6 of the Act are these :
	  (1) if the Government is given a power to sell the
	  produce at a lower price than the notified rate to
	  the  Government   companies  it  will	 enable	 the
	  Government  to  cripple  or  in  slow	 degrees  to
	  eliminate the	 other consumers  in the field. This
	  conferment of	 power on  the state  Government  is
	  discriminatory and unreasonable,
	  (2) a Government company is as such a legal entity
	  as  any   other  entity.   It	 is   a	  commercial
	  corporation acting  on  its  own  behalf  and	 all
	  consumers of	the forest  produce should  have  an
	  equal opportunity to get the goods. The Government
	  company could not, therefore, be given any favour,
	  (3) there  is no  nexus between  the object  to be
	  achieved by  the  Act	 and  the  exemption  to  be
	  granted in favour of the Government companies, and
	  (4) the submission made by the Additional Advocate
	  General to  the effect  that he  could not support
	  the validity of section 6 of the Act.
     We find it difficult to accept the grounds on which the
High  Court   has  held	  section  6   of  the	 Act  to  be
unconstitutional. So  far as consumers of forest produce who
are not granted any exemption under section 6 of the Act are
concerned, any sale of forest produce in their favour cannot
be effected  at a  price less  than the price notified under
section 3  of the Act. The notified price has to be fixed on
the basis  of the  recommendation to  be made  by the Expert
Committee constituted  under section  4 of  the Act  and the
Expert Committee  is required to take into consideration the
market price of the forest produce, the cost of regenerating
and  maintaining   the	forest	 produce  in   cases   where
regeneration is	 necessary after  selling the forest produce
and such other matters as may be prescribed. If section 5 of
the Act provides
592
that the forest produce covered by the Act shall not be sold
at a  price less  than the  price which is determined on the
basis of  the factors  referred to  above  which  appear  to
bequite relevant they cannot have any grievance. They cannot
claim that  they must  be shown	 any concession and that the
forest produce	should be  made available to them at a price
which would  be lower than the market price. Even when it is
stated that  any company  owned by the Central Government or
the Government	of Kerala or a co-operative society (subject
to the limit as regards the quantity of forest produce to be
supplied)  may	 be  supplied  forest  produce	without	 the
constraint contained  in section  5 of	the Act, it does not
mean that the forest produce would be made available to them
at throw-away  prices. It  is reasonable  to expect that the
price payable  for the	forest produce	in question  by	 the
Government companies  or  co-operative	societies  would  be
determined after  negotiations having  regard to  the public
interest. In  almost all the statutes by which the fiscal or
economic interests of the State are regulated, provision for
granting  exemption   in  appropriate	cases	would	have
necessarily to	be there and the power to grant exemption is
invariably  conferred	on  the	 Government  concerned.	 The
Legislature which  is burdened	with heavy  legislative	 and
other types  of work is not able to find time to consider in
detail the  hardships and  difficulties that  are likely  to
result by  the enforcement of the statute concerned. It has,
therefore, now become a well-recognised and constitutionally
accepted  legislative  practice	 to  incorporate  provisions
conferring the powers of exemption on the Government in such
statutes.  Such	 exemptions  cannot  ordinarily	 be  granted
secretly.  A  notification  would  have	 to  be	 issued	 and
published in the Gazette and in the ordinary course it would
be subject to the scrutiny by the Legislature. The power can
be exercised  only in the public interest as provided by the
section itself.	 The validity  of provisions  conferring the
power of  exemption has	 been consistently  upheld  by	this
Court in  a number of decisions commencing with the State of
Bombay and Anr. v. F.N. Balsara, [1951] S.C.R. 682. The next
question is whether section 6 of the Act which restricts the
power of  the Government  to grant  exemption  to  companies
owned by  the Central Government or the Government of Kerala
and to	co-operative societies	only is	 valid.	 As  far  as
Government undertakings	 and companies are concerned, it has
to be  held that  they form  a class by themselves since any
profit that
593
they may  make would in the end result in the benefit to the
members of  the general public. The profit, if any, enriches
the public  coffer and	not the	 private coffer. The role of
industries in  the  public  sector  is	very  sensitive	 and
critical from  the point  of view of national economy. Their
survival very often depends upon the budgetary provision and
not upon  private  resources  which  are  available  to	 the
industries in the private sector. They are often established
to break  the power  of strangulation  on economy  which the
industries in  private sector  may have developed and may be
using to  choke the  industrial growth	of the	country.  An
exemption or  a concession might provide them some breathing
time or	 settling down	time. It may be treated as a subsidy
at the	worst. This  appears to be the policy behind Article
19(6)(ii) of the Constitution. In appropriate cases in order
to place  an industry owned by the Government on an enduring
basis in  the national interest, some concession may have to
be shown  to it.  It is neither alleged nor established that
if the	exemption is annulled the petitioners will be richer
by a  single paise  or if it is retained they will be poorer
by a single paise. The only purpose hinted at is that if the
public sector  is made	to pay	more, it  may use  less raw-
material which	in turn	 might be  available to	 the private
sector. Not  a very laudable purpose to say the least of it.
The  action   of  the  State  Government  in  exempting	 the
Government companies  from the operation of section 5 of the
Act does  not in the instant case amount to the exclusion of
the industries in the private sector from their business nor
does it	 deny the  usual supplies  of forest produce used as
raw-material by	 these industries  as alleged  by them.	 The
Government is  not shown to be taking any undue advantage of
the monopoly  it enjoys	 as the owner of the forests and the
position it  holds as the sole supplier of forest produce in
fixing the  minimum prices in order to preserve the national
wealth from  being wasted away. In the circumstances of this
case  it  cannot  be  said  that  the  provision  is  either
arbitrary  or	unreasonable  even   though  the  Government
industries may	be rivals  in trade to the industries in the
private sector.	 In Sher  Singh v.  Union of  India &  Ors.,
[1984] 1  S.C.R. 464 this Court has upheld section 47 (H) of
the  Motor  Vehicles  Act,  1939  under	 which	a  statutory
preference is  shown to	 a State  Transport Undertaking.  In
Viklad Coal  Merchant, Patiala	& Ors.	v. Union  of India &
Ors., [1984]  1 S.C.R.	657, the  preference  shown  to	 the
Government in
594
allotment of  railway wagons  for transporting coal has been
upheld. Learned counsel for the respondents however depended
upon the  decision of  this Court  in State  of Rajasthan v.
Mukanchand & Ors., [1964] 6 S.C.R. 903 by which an exemption
granted in  respect of debts due to the State or a scheduled
bank from  the operation  of section  2(e) of the Jagirdar's
Debt Reduction	Act, 1937  was held to be in conformity with
the object  of the Act and so violative of Article 14 of the
Constitution.  That   case  depended   on  the	 facts	 and
circumstances surrounding  the statute	in question.  We may
refer here  to the  decision of	 this  Court  in  Fatehchand
Himmatlal &  Ors. v.  State of	Maharashtra etc.,  [1977]  2
S.C.R. 828 where it is observed at page 849 thus :
	  "There is no merit in the plea. Liabilities due to
	  government to	 local authorities  are	 not  tained
	  with exploitation  of the  debtor. Likewise, debts
	  due to  banking companies do not ordinarily suffer
	  from the  overreaching, unscrupulousness  or harsh
	  treatment. Moreover,	financial institutions have,
	  until recently,  treated the	villages  and  urban
	  worker and  petty farmer as untouchables and so do
	  not  figure	in  the	  picture.  To	 exempt	 the
	  categories above referred to is reasonable."
     Hence preference  shown to	 Government companies  under
section 6  of the Act cannot be considered discriminatory as
they  stand   in  a   different	 class	altogether  and	 the
classification made  between Government companies and others
for the purposes of the Act is a valid one. Same is the case
with the clause which gives power under section 6 of the Act
to the	Government to  exempt sales  of	 forest	 produce  in
favour of  co-operative societies  upto the  limit mentioned
therein. In P.V. Sivarajan, v. Union of India & Anr., [1959]
Suppl. 1  S.C.R. 779  the exemption  granted  in  favour  of
traders carrying  on export  business in  a small  scale who
formed co-operative  societies was upheld. In Orient Weaving
Mills (P) Ltd. v. Union of India, [1962] Suppl. 3 S.C.R. 481
this Court  upheld the exemption granted in favour of power-
loom weavers  in a  cooperative society	 from  the  levy  of
central excise	duties. We  do not find any substance in the
contention that	 the provision	granting exemption in favour
of Government  companies and  the co-operative	societies as
stated above is
595
unconstitutional. We must, however, express our dis-approval
of one	of the	reasons given by the High Court for striking
down section 6 of the Act, namely, "private sector consumers
generally show	more concern  in the  speedy  production  of
goods, in  the finished	 products and  in the  sale of	them
which is  in public interest as well." The above observation
is not	warranted and  is presumably  based on	the personal
opinion of  the learned	 judges. It is misleading and cannot
in the	circumstances of the case serve as a prop to support
the contention of the respondents.
     Therefore, the  decision of the High Court that section
6 of the Act was violative of Article 14 of the Constitution
is liable  to be  set aside.  We do  not also approve of the
finding of  the High  Court  that  even	 assuming  that	 the
section was  valid, the	 notification issued  thereunder was
invalid. It  may be stated here that the writ petitioners on
whom the  burden lay  have not	given any valid reason as to
why we should hold that the impugned notification was not in
the public  interest. As  mentioned earlier  the  appellant,
Hindustan Paper	 Corporation Ltd.  established	its  factory
after entering	into an	 agreement with the State Government
as regards  the regular	 supply	 of  raw-material  from	 the
forests in  the State  of Kerala for production of newsprint
and that  the said  factory was	 employing  a  large  labour
force. The  other two concerns in whose favour the exemption
is granted  by the impugned notification are the concerns of
Kerala Government  itself. We  have no material in this case
to hold that the impugned notification was not in the public
interest. We  accordingly set  aside the finding recorded by
the High Court on the validity of the notification also.
     In the  result, we	 allow the  appeals, set  aside	 the
judgment of  the High  Court and  dismiss the writ petitions
filed in  the High  Court. There shall, however, be no order
as to costs.
A.P.J.					    Appeals allowed.
596




