

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
State Of West Bengal & Anr vs Saral Kumar Sen Gupta & Anr on 15 April, 1986Equivalent citations: 1987 AIR  514, 1986 SCR  (2) 515
Author: E Venkataramiah
Bench: Venkataramiah, E.S. (J)
           PETITIONER:
STATE OF WEST BENGAL & ANR.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
SARAL KUMAR SEN GUPTA & ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT15/04/1986

BENCH:
VENKATARAMIAH, E.S. (J)
BENCH:
VENKATARAMIAH, E.S. (J)
THAKKAR, M.P. (J)

CITATION:
 1987 AIR  514		  1986 SCR  (2) 515
 1986 SCC  (3)	45	  1986 SCALE  (1)630


ACT:
     West Bengal  Government Premises  (Teanancy Regulation)
Act, 1976  - S.3(2)  - Agreement  of tenancy - Stipulation -
'Premises to  be used  exclusively by the tenant and members
of his family' - Tenant ceasing to occupy premises himself -
Whether liable to eviction.



HEADNOTE:
     Respondent No.1  - an  employee of the State Government
was allotted  on lease	a two-roomed flat. Clause (7) of the
agreement of  tenancy provided	that the  premises shall  be
used  exclusively  for	the  purpose  of  the  residence  of
Respondent No.1	 and the members of his family. At that time
the family  of the Respondent No.1 consisted of himself, his
elder brother and three unmarried sisters. In the year 1959,
Respondent No.1	 got married  and alongwith his wife shifted
to another  flat taken	on lease.  His elder brother and two
unmarried sisters continued to be in occupation of the flat.
     The  Prescribed   Authority  under	  the  West   Bengal
Government Premises  (Tenancy Regulation) Act, 1976 issued a
notice to  Respondent No.1  calling upon  him  to  quit	 and
deliver possession  of the  flat  on  the  ground  that	 the
tenancy had  automatically terminated  as provided in s.3(2)
of the	Act because  he had ceased to occupy it and that cl.
(7) of the agreement of the tenancy had been violated.
     Respondent No.  1 filed  a Writ  Petition under Article
226 alleging  that  since  Respondent  No.2  was  his  elder
brother he was a member of his family and he was entitled to
live in the flat even though Respondent No.1 himself was not
living therein.	 The petition  was  dismissed  by  a  Single
Judge.
     In appeal,	 the Division Bench held that cl. (7) of the
agreement of tenancy was not violated even if the tenant had
himself	 ceased	 to  occupy  and  a  member  of	 his  family
continued to reside in the flat, and allowed the appeal.
516
     Allowing the appeal by the State to this Court,
^
     HELD: 1.  Respondent  No.	1  violated  cl.(7)  of	 the
agreement of  tenancy when  he ceased to occupy the premises
himself. The judgment of the Division Bench is set aside and
that of the Single Judge is restored. [521 A-B]
     2. What  cl.(7) of	 the agreement of tenancy stipulates
is that the premises can be used by respondent No. 1 and the
members of his family, that is to say, respondent No.1 could
stay himself  along with  his  family  members	and  not  by
respondent No.1	 or the	 members of  his family.  As long as
respondent No.	1 is  residing	in  the	 premises  he  could
accommodate along with him any other member of his family in
the premises.  But when	 he ceases to reside in the premises
and occupies other premises for residence as a separate unit
other members  constituting a  separate unit cannot in their
own right  as a	 separate unit	continue  to  get  the	same
without violating  cl.(7) of the agreement of tenancy. It is
the condition  of the  lease that the tenant in whose favour
the premises are leased should reside in the premises let to
him and	 not in	 some other  premises during the currency of
the lease. [519 E-G]
     Baldev Sahai  Bangia v.  R.C. Bhasin,  [1982] 3  S.C.R.
670, distinguished.
     3. To  meet the  growing demand for Government premises
the State  Legislature had  to amend  the Act  by  the	West
Bengal Act  XLVI of  1980, by introducing cl. (ia) in sub-s.
(2) of	s.3 of	the Act	 which provided	 that a	 tenancy  in
respect of  a Government  Premises would stand automatically
terminated without  any notice	to quit where the tenant had
subsequently built  a house  or acquired (by purchase, gift,
inheritance, lease,  exchange or  otherwise) a	house or  an
apartment, either  in his  own name  or in  the name  of any
member of his family, within a reasonable distance from such
Government premises. [520 F-H]



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION : Civil Appeal No. 9963 of
1983.
     From the  Judgment and  Order dated  3rd August 1983 of
the Clacutta  High Court  in First  Misc. Appeal  (Mandamus)
Tender No. 168 of 1983.
517
     N.N. Gooptu, D.P. Mukherjee and G.S. Chatterjee for the
Appellants.
     Shankar Ghose and Rathin Das for the Respondents.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     VENKATARAMIAH,J. The  State of  West Bengal, the Deputy
Secretary and the Assistant Secretary, Housing Department to
the Government	of West	 Bengal are  the appellants  in this
appeal. The  above appeal  is filed by special leave against
the judgment  dated August  3, 1983  of the  High  Court  of
Calcutta in  Appeal from  Original Order  T. No. 168 of 1983
allowing the  appeal against  the judgment dated January 18,
1983 of	 the learned Single Judge of the Calcutta High Court
in C.R. No. 12684 (W) of 1976. Respondent No. 1, Saral Kumar
Sen Gupta was an Upper Division Assistant in the Directorate
of Food and Supplies, Government of West Bengal. In the year
1958 he	 was allotted on lease a two-roomed flat bearing No.
5 in  Block 'F'	 of the	 Government Housing  Estate,  Karaya
Road, Calcutta. The allotment was made under an agreement of
tenancy which contained the terms and conditions under which
the flat  had been allotted in his favour. Clause (7) of the
agreement read as follows :
	  "(7) You  should use	the premises exclusively for
	  the purpose  of  residence  of  yourself  and	 the
	  members of  your family  and for  no other purpose
	  whatsover."
					    (emphasis added)
     It is  stated that	 in the year 1958 the members of the
family of  Respondent No.1,  Saral Kumar Sen Gupta consisted
of himself,  his elder	brother	 Santosh  Kumar	 Sen  Gupta,
Respondent  No.2,  and	three  unmarried  sisters.  The	 1st
respondent was	married in  the year  1959. After  some time
Respondent No. 1 along with his wife shifted to another flat
which he  had taken  on lease. His elder brother and his two
unmarried  sisters   were  in  occupation  of  the  flat  in
question. On  coming to know that Respondent No.1 had ceased
to occupy  the flat  and that only his elder brother and his
two  unmarried	sisters	 were  residing	 there,	 the  Deputy
Secretary, Housing Department of the
518
Government of  West Bengal,  the Prescribed  Authority under
the West  Bengal Government  Premises  (Tenancy	 Regulation)
Act, 1976  (hereinafter referred  to as	 'the Act') issued a
notice to  Respondent No.1  calling upon  him  to  quit	 and
deliver possession  of the  flat  on  the  ground  that	 the
tenancy had  automatically terminated as provided in section
3(2) of	 the Act  as he	 had ceased  to occupy	it and	that
clause (7)  of the  agreement of  tenancy had been violated.
Aggrieved by  the said	notice Respondent  No.1 filed a writ
petition in the High Court of Calcutta contending that since
Respondent No.2	 was his brother and as such a member of his
family, Respondent  No.2 was  entitled to  live in  the said
flat even  though Respondent No.1, the tenant was not living
therein. The  writ petition  came up  for hearing before the
learned Single Judge of the High Court who after hearing the
parties dismissed  it. Against	the judgment  of the learned
Single Judge  Respondent No.  1 filed  an appeal  before the
Division Bench of the High Court. The Division Bench allowed
the appeal  and made  the rule	absolute holding  that since
Respondent No.2,  the elder brother of Respondent No.1 was a
member of  the family  of Respondent No.1, clause (7) of the
agreement of  tenancy had  not been violated. In other words
the Division  Bench was	 of the	 view that clause (7) of the
agreement of tenancy was not violated even if the tenant had
himself ceased to occupy a member of his family continued to
reside in  the flat.  This appeal  by special leave is filed
against the judgment of the Division Bench of the High Court
of Calcutta.
     It may be mentioned here that after the judgment of the
learned Single	Judge, the  State Government took possession
of the	flat in	 question on  January 27,  1983 and  it	 has
continued to  be in  the possession  of the State Government
notwithstanding the  appeal of Respondent No.1 being allowed
by the	Division Bench of High Court by virtue of an interim
order passed  by this  Court. Even  now the  flat is  in the
possession of the Government of West Bengal.
     The  building   in	 question   belongs  to	  the  State
Government and	the incidents  of its  lease are governed by
the Act.  Section 3(2) of the Act provides that a tenancy in
respect of  a Government  premises shall stand automatically
terminated without  any notice to quit, where the tenant has
violated the  terms of	the lease or made default in payment
of rent for
519
three consecutive  months. The	provisos to  section 3(2) of
the Act	 are not relevant for the purposes of this case. The
Prescribed Authority  appointed under the Act is entitled to
recover possession  of any Government premises from a tenant
under section  3(2) of the Act on the violation of the terms
of  the	  lease.  The	short  question	  which	 arises	 for
consideration in  this case  is whether	 Respondent No.1 who
was the	 tenant of  the Government  premises in question had
violated the  terms of	the lease.  We have  already set out
above clause  (7) of  the agreement  of tenancy. It provides
that the premises can be used exclusively for the purpose of
the residence  of Respondent  No.1 along with the members of
his family  and for no other purpose whatsoever. Admittedly,
Respondent No.1 has not been residing in the premises from a
date prior to the date on which the notice was issued to him
calling upon  him to  quit and	deliver	 possession  of	 the
premises. The  Division Bench  of the  High Court was of the
view that  since Santosh  Kumar Sen Gupta, the elder brother
of Respondent  No.1 had	 been residing	in the premises, the
condition contained  in	 clause	 (7)  of  the  agreement  of
tenancy had  not been violated. It was of the view that even
though Respondent  No.1 had  himself  along  with  his	wife
shifted to some other flat or premises the building could be
used by	 his brother who could be said to be a member of the
family of  Respondent No.1.  With great	 respect  we  cannot
agree with  the view taken by the Division Bench of the High
Court.	What   clause  (7)   of	 the  agreement	 of  tenancy
stipulates is  that the premises could be used by Respondent
No. 1  and the	members	 of  his  family,  that	 is  to	 say
Respondent No.1	 could stay  himself along  with his  family
members and  not by  Respondent No.1  or the  members of his
family. As  long as  Respondent No.  1 is  residing  in	 the
premises he  could accommodate	along  with  him  any  other
member of  his family in the premises. But when he ceases to
reside in  the premises	 and  occupies	other  premises	 for
residence as  a separate  unit other  members constituting a
separate unit  cannot in  their own right as a separate unit
continue to  occupy the same without violating clause (7) of
the agreement  of tenancy.  It is the condition of the lease
that the  tenant in  whose favour  the premises	 are  leased
should reside  in the  premises let  to him  and not in some
other premises during the currency of the lease.
     The learned  counsel for  the Ist	Respondent drew	 our
attention to  the decision  of this  Court in  Baldev  Sahai
Bangia
520
v. R.C.	 Bhasin, [1982] 3 S.C.R. 670 and contended that this
Court had  recognised the right of the members of the family
of a  tenant to	 reside in  a building	taken on  lease even
after the tenant had left the premises. We have gone through
that decision.	In that	 case this  Court was concerned with
clause (d)  of section	14(1) of the Delhi Rent Control Act,
1958 which provided that where the premises were let for use
as a  residence and neither the tenant nor any member of his
family	had   been  residing  for  a  period  of  six  month
immediately  before   the  date	  of  the   filing  of	 the
application, the  landlord could  apply for  eviction of the
tenant. This  decision	is  of	no  assistance	to  the	 Ist
Respondent since  the language	of section  14(1)(d) of	 the
Delhi Rent  Control Act, 1958 is different from the language
in clause (7) of the agreement of tenancy in the case before
us. The expression 'neither the tenant nor any member of his
family' in  the Delhi  Rent Control Act, 1958 was capable of
the construction  that if  either the  tenant or a member of
his family  was residing in the premises section 14(1)(d) of
that Act was not attracted. But in the present case the term
contained in clause (7) of the agreement of tenancy required
that the  premises could  be used  for the  residence of the
tenant and  (along with	 him) the  members of the family and
not tenant  or the  members of	his family in the sense that
the tenant stays somewhere else and his other family members
stay in	 the leased  premises. The  decision relied  on	 is,
therefore, clearly distinguishable.
     It has  to be borne in mind that the buildings owned by
the Government	are limited  in number	and there is a great
demand for  allotment of Government premises. The Government
cannot afford  to allow	 one family to have the privilege of
occupying two  buildings. It is in order to meet the growing
demand for the Government premises the State Legislature had
to amend  the Act  by the  West	 Bengal	 Act  XLVI  of	1980
introducing clause  (ia) in  sub-section (2) of section 3 of
the Act	 which provided	 that a	 tenancy  in  respect  of  a
Government premises  would  stand  automatically  terminated
without any notice to quit where the tenant had subsequently
built a	 house or  acquired (by purchase, gift, inheritance,
lease, exchange	 or otherwise)	a  house  or  an  apartment,
either in  his own  name or in the name of any member of his
family, within	a reasonable  distance from  such Government
premises. We  have referred to the above clause only to show
the magnitude of the
521
shortage of housing accommodation. In any view of the matter
it has	to be held that Respondent No. 1 violated clause (7)
of the	agreement of  tenancy when  he ceased  to occupy the
premises himself.  The judgment of the Division Bench of the
High Court  is, therefore,  liable to  be set  aside. It  is
accordingly set	 aside. The  judgment of  the learned Single
Judge is restored.
     The appeal is accordingly allowed. No costs.
A.P.J.					     Appeal allowed.
522




