

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Commissioner Of Income Tax U.P., ... vs J.K. Hosiery Factory, Kanpur on 19 March, 1986Equivalent citations: 1986 AIR 1665, 1986 SCR  (1) 907
Author: S Mukharji
Bench: Mukharji, Sabyasachi (J)
           PETITIONER:
COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX U.P., LUCKNOW

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
J.K. HOSIERY FACTORY, KANPUR

DATE OF JUDGMENT19/03/1986

BENCH:
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)
BENCH:
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)
PATHAK, R.S.

CITATION:
 1986 AIR 1665		  1986 SCR  (1) 907
 1986 SCC  Supl.  104	  1986 SCALE  (1)471


ACT:
     Right to  carry forward the unabsorbed depreciation and
to set	off by	a unregistered	firm in one year to the next
year when  it was  registered, whether	permissible - Income
Tax Act, 1922 sections 10(2)(vi) read with 24(i) and 24(2).



HEADNOTE:
     M/s.  J.K.	  Hosiery  Factory,  Kanpur  the  respondent
assessee  firm	 originally  consisted	of  three  Singhania
Brothers and  one J.P.	Agarwal as  partners. The  Singhania
brothers retired  in 1946  and in  their place	Kamala	Town
Trust  was  alleged  to	 have  become  partner.	 During	 the
assessment year	 1949-50  the  unregistered  firm  had	been
allowed an  unabsorbed depreciation  of Rs. 43.963. The firm
claimed a  set off  thereof in	the assessment	year 1950-51
when it	 was registered.  The Tribunal	refused to allow the
carry forward  and  set	 off  but  the	High  Court  in	 the
reference answered  the question  against Revenue. Hence the
appeal by the Revenue.
     Dismissing the appeal,the Court,
^
     HELD :  1.1 Having regard to the scheme of the relevant
provisions and	in view	 of the provisions of sections 10(2)
(vi) read  with section	 24(1) and section 24(2) of the 1922
Act, the  deduction of	the unabsorbed	depreciation  should
have been  allowed, in	as much	 in both  the years the firm
continued -  in one  year it  was unregistered,	 in the next
year it	 got itself  transferred into  registered,  but	 its
identity was  not  lost.  The  firm  was  one.	Further	 the
assessee was  entitled to  an interpretation  favourable  to
him. [915 C-D]
     1.2 Where	two interpretations were possible, the court
should take  the interpretation	 that is  favourable to	 the
assessee bearing  in mind  that a  taxing statute  is  being
construed. [914 H; 915 A]
     1.3 The proviso (b) below section 10(2)(vi) of the 1922
908
Act dealt  with every  assessee. It specified that where the
assessee was  a registered  firm, then	in the assessment of
its partners,  if full	effect could  not be  given  to	 any
depreciation  allowance	  and  where  the  assessee  was  an
unregistered  firm  where  there  was  no  question  of	 its
partners being	assessed, the  depreciation which  could  be
carried forward	 was  the  unabsorbed  depreciation  in	 the
assessment of  the firm	 itself. There	was nothing  in	 the
section which indicated that unregistered firm could not get
the benefit of the carry forward. [911 G-H; 912 A-B]
     1.4 If  section 24 is properly read in conjunction with
clause (b)  of the  proviso to sub-section (2) of section 24
which gives  the right	to carry  forward the  loss then the
effect would  be that  loss had	 to be	carried forward	 and
adjusted first against the profits of the next year. Neither
of the	provisions prohibited  that carry forward unabsorbed
depreciation in	 case the  firm	 became	 registered  in	 the
subsequent year.  The entity is the firm, registration makes
no difference in that entity. By registration, the firm gets
certain	 additional   qualification  and  puts	upon  itself
certain additional  burden. The	 scheme of  the Act does not
indicate  any	intention  to	deprive	  the	subsequently
registered firm of its right to carry forward the unabsorbed
depreciation.  Depreciation  is	 given	to  the	 person	 who
becomes entitled  to it. The subsequently registered firm is
composed of  him also.	Therefore, in principle, there is no
basis for  the proposition that he should not be entitled to
get the benefit of depreciation. [912 B-E]
     Indian  Iron  &  Steel  Co.  Ltd.	v.  Commissioner  of
Incometax,  Bengal,   11  I.T.R.   328	P.C.  discussed	 and
distinguished.
     Ballarpur Collieries co. v. Commissioner of Income Tax,
Poona, 92 I.T.R. 219 held inapplicable.
     1.5 It  could not	be contended that since a registered
firm was  liable to  a separate	 tax called  the "firm tax",
which is over and above the tax payable by the partners, the
registered firm	 should be treated like an ordinary assessee
for the	 purposes of  the assessment  of "firm	tax" and the
losses of  the earlier	years computed	in the assessment of
the
909
firm should  be carried	 forward and  set  off	against	 its
business profits  of the  subsequent years. Though the "firm
tax" was  levied under	the Finance  Act each year, it was a
part and parcel of the income tax which was levied under the
provisions of  the Income-tax  Act. If	the contentions were
accepted it  would lead to an anomalous position inasmuch as
there would  be two  assessments in  the case  of registered
firms, one  for purposes of levy of "firm tax" and the other
for purposes of levy of income tax and the quantum of income
in the	two assessments would be different. Such a result is
not contemplated under the Income tax Act. Imposition of tax
was on	the registered firm as well as on unregistered firm.
The manner  of levy  and realisation is different in case of
registered firm.  Therefore, under the provisions of section
32(2) for the purpose of setting off unabsorbed depreciation
carried forward	 from a preceding year, it was not necessary
that the  business in  respect	of  which  the	depreciation
allowance  was	 originally  worked  out  should  remain  in
existence in such succeeding year.[914 c-e]
     K.T.Wire Products	v. Union  of India & Ors., 92 I.T.R.
459 (All)  and Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay City II v.
Estate and Finance Ltd., 111 I.T.R. 119 (BY) referred to.



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION : Civil Appeal Nos. 1371-
72 (NT) of 1974.
     From the  Judgment and  Order dated 4th August, 1972 of
the Allahabad High Court in I.T. Reference No. 426 of 1963.
     S.C.  Manchanda   and  Miss   A.  Subhashini   for	 the
Appellant.
     V.S. Desai and M.M. Kashtriya for the Respondent.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     SABYASACHI MUKHARJI,  J. These appeals by special leave
are from the judgment and order of the Division Bench of the
Allahabad High Court dated 4th August, 1972.
     M/s J.K.  Hosiery Factory,	 Kanpur, the  assessee	firm
herein, originally consisted of Sir Padampat Singhania, L.
910
Lakshmipat Singhania  and L.  Kailashpat Singhania  and	 one
J.P. Agarwal  as  partners.  In	 January,  1946,  the  three
Singhania brothers  appeared to	 have retired  from the firm
and in	their place the Kamla Town Trust was alleged to have
become partner.
     The revenue  challenged this reconstitution of the firm
and according  to the  revenue, the Singhania brothers never
retired and the trust never became a partner. Four questions
were referred  by the  Tribunal	 to  the  High	Court  under
section	 66(1)	 of  the   Indian   Income-tax	 Act,	1922
(hereinafter called  the 'Act').  The question	No. 4 is the
only question  canvassed before	 us and	 survives for  these
appeals. The same is as follows:
	  "Whether,  under   the   provisions	of   section
	  10(2)(vi), proviso  (b) of the Income-tax Act, the
	  unabsorbed depreciation  of the  unregistered firm
	  in 1949-50  can be  allowed as  a deduction in the
	  assessments of the partners of the registered firm
	  in the assessment year 1950-51?"
     Question No. 4 is relevant only for the assessment year
1950-51. For  the previous assessment year 1949-50, the firm
had been  allowed an  unabsorbed depreciation of Rs. 43,963.
The firm  claimed a  set off  thereof in the assessment year
1950-51.The Tribunal  refused to  grant this  set off on the
view that  in the  year 1949-50,  the assessee	firm was  an
unregistered firm  while it  had been  registered under	 the
Income-tax Act	for  the  year	1950-51.  According  to	 the
Tribunal,  the	 loss  on  account  of	depreciation  of  an
unregistered firm  could  not  be  carried  forward  to	 the
succeeding year	 in case  the firm got registered. It was so
held by the Tribunal.
     The High  Court by	 reference to  section 10(2)(vi) and
proviso	 (b)   to  section   24(2)  of	 the  Act   and	  on
interpretation of  the provisions and scheme of the sections
held that  the Tribunal	 was  not  right  and  answered	 the
question in  favour of	the assessee. These appeals are from
that decision.
     In order  to appreciate  this question, it is necessary
to bear	 in mind  the relevant provisions of the Act. At the
relevant time, sub-section (2) of section 2 was as follows:
911
	  "'assessee' means  a person  by whom income tax is
	  payable."
     The relevant provisions of section 10 were as follows:
	  "10. (1)  The tax  shall be payable by an assessee
	  under the  head 'profits  and gains  of  business,
	  profession or	 vocation' in respect of the profits
	  or gains  of any  business, profession or vocation
	  carried on by him.
	  (2) Such  profits or gains shall be computed after
	  making the following allowances, namely : - .....
	  (vi) in respect of depreciation ....
	  Provided  that   -  ......   (b)  where,   in	 the
	  assessment of the assessee or if the assessee is a
	  registered  firm,   in  the	assessment  of	 its
	  partners, full  effect cannot be given to any such
	  allowance in any year not being a year which ended
	  prior to  the 1st  day of  April, 1939,  owing  to
	  their being  no profits  or gains  chargeable	 for
	  that year,  or  owing	 to  the  profits  or  gains
	  chargeable being  less than  the allowance,  then,
	  subject to  the provisions  of clause	 (b) of	 the
	  proviso to  sub-section (2)  of  section  24,	 the
	  allowance or part of the allowance to which effect
	  has not  been given,	as the case may be, shall be
	  added	 to   the  amount   of	the   allowance	 for
	  depreciation for  the following year and deemed to
	  be part  of that allowance, or if there is no such
	  allowance for	 that year,  be	 deemed	 to  be	 the
	  allowance  for  the  next  year,  and	 so  on	 for
	  succeeding years."
     It is  apparent, as  the High  Court  noted,  that	 the
proviso dealt  with every  assessee. It specified that where
the assessee  was a  registered firm, then in the assessment
of its	partners, if  full effect  could not be given to any
depreciation  allowance	  and  where  the  assessee  was  an
unregistered  firm  where  there  was  no  question  of	 its
partners being	assessed, the  depreciation which  could  be
carried forward	 was  the  unabsorbed  depreciation  in	 the
assessment of  the firm	 itself. The  assessee in  the first
year being an
912
unregistered  firm   was  entitled   to	 carry	forward	 the
unabsorbed  depreciation   under  this	proviso.  There	 was
nothing in  the section	 which indicated  that	unregistered
firm could  not get  that benefit  of the  carry-forward. It
must  be   borne  in  mind  that  the  firm  which  suffered
depreciation was  unregistered in  the accounting  year i.e.
1949-50 and  it is  the very  same  firm  which	 got  itself
registered in the subsequent year. If section 24 is properly
read in	 conjunction with  clause (b) of the proviso to sub-
section (2)  of section	 24 which  gives the  right to carry
forward the  loss then	the effect would be that loss had to
be carried forward and adjusted first against the profits of
the next  year. Neither	 of the	 provisions prohibited	that
carry-forward  unabsorbed  depreciation	 in  case  the	firm
became registered  in the  subsequent year. This appears, in
our opinion,  on a plain reading of the different provisions
of the	section. The  entity is the firm, registration makes
no difference to that entity. By registration, the firm gets
certain	 additional  qualifications  and  puts	upon  itself
certain additional  burden. The	 assessee in both the cases,
however, is  the same. We were referred to the provisions of
section 23(5)(b) and section 24 to section 71 of the Income-
tax Act,  1961. We  do not  think that	on this	 aspect	 the
scheme of  the Act  indicates any  intention to	 deprive the
subsequently registered	 firm of  its right to carry forward
the unabsorbed	depreciation. Depreciation  is given  to the
person	who   becomes  entitled	  to  it.  The	subsequently
registered firm	 is composed  of  him  also.  Therefore,  in
principle, there  is no basis for proposition that he should
not be entitled to get the benefit of depreciation.
     Our attention  was drawn to certain observations of the
Judicial Committee  of the  Privy Council  in  the  case  of
Indian Iron  & Steel Co. Ltd. v. Commissioner of Income-Tax,
Bengal, 11  I.T.R. 328.	 There the  Privy Council dealt with
entirely different  set of  circumstances. By  an  agreement
dated  8th  September,	1936,  made  between  the  appellant
company and  another company  named the	 Bengal Iron Company
Ltd., the  former had  agreed to  acquire and  take over the
whole of  the property	and assets of the latter as existing
on the	date of	 transfer.In pursuance of this agreement the
Bengal Company	transferred all	 its property  and assets on
the 2nd	 December,  1936  to  the  appellant  company  which
continued to  carry on the business of the Bengal Company as
part of and in combination with its
913
existing  business.   The  agreement   contained  a   clause
assigning 'so  far as  capable of  being assigned, any claim
which the  Bengal Company  may have in respect of unabsorbed
depreciation allowances'.  At the  time of  the amalgamation
the Bengal Company had to its credit unabsorbed depreciation
allowance to  the extent of Rs. 85,45,150 which it could set
off against  its future	 profits. Similarly,  the  appellant
company had  an unabsorbed  depreciation  allowance  of	 Rs.
62,00,775. It  was held by the Judicial Committee, affirming
the decision  of the  High Court  of Calcutta,	(i) that the
appellant company  was not entitled to have the depreciation
allowance of  the Bengal  Company computed  on the  original
cost of	 such assets  to the Bengal Company for the whole of
the previous  year but only up to the date of succession and
that after  that date  it had to be computed on the original
cost to	 the appellant	company; and (ii) that the appellant
company was  not  in  law  entitled  to	 carry	forward	 the
unabsorbed depreciation	 allowance of the Bengal Company. It
was further  held that	the word 'assessee' in section 10(2)
must, when  there is  a successor to the business charged to
tax, be	 read in certain of the paragraphs as including both
predecessor and	 successor, but	 it does  not  follow  as  a
consequence  that   the	 unabsorbed   depreciation  of	 the
predecessor must  be added  to that of the successor or that
even in	 a case	 when the  only business  concerned is	that
which is  transferred. The business when transferred carries
to the purchaser its unabsorbed depreciation.
     Here no  such problem  arises. Here we have a situation
where the  same person	previously carrying  on business  as
unregistered firm  is now carrying on business as registered
firm.
     Our attention  was drawn  to the  observations  of	 the
Division Bench	of the	Bombay High  Court in  the  case  of
Ballarpur Collieries  Co.  v.  Commissioner  of	 Income-Tax,
Poona, 92  I.T.R. 219.	But the	 said observations  are	 not
relevant for our present purposes.
     Similarly, reliance  was placed  on the observations of
the Division  Bench of the Allahabad High Court in K.T. Wire
Products v.  Union of India & Ors., 92 I.T.R. 459. It may be
mentioned that	there it  was noted  that under	 the general
scheme of  the Income-tax  Act,	 losses	 and  profits  under
different heads had to be aggregated and the net income
914
arrived at  which was liable to tax. If the resultant figure
was a  loss, it	 was carried forward and set off against the
business  profits  of  the  succeeding	year.  This  is	 the
position in  the case  of all  assessees  except  registered
firms. In  the	case  of  registered  firms,  the  net	loss
including depreciation	allowance, if  any, is	allocated to
the partners,  who alone  were entitled	 to set off the loss
allocated to  them in  their individual	 assessments and  to
carry  forward	 any  loss  which  remained  unabsorbed,  as
provided in  sections 32(2) and 75(2) of the Income-tax Act,
1961. The firm as such was not entitled to carry forward the
losses	determined  in	the  assessment.  It  could  not  be
contended that	since a	 registered firm  was  liable  to  a
separate tax  called the "firm tax", which is over and above
the tax	 payable by the partners, the registered firm should
be treated like an ordinary assessee for the purposes of the
assessment of "firm tax" and the losses of the earlier years
computed in  the assessment  of the  firm should  be carried
forward and  set off  against its  business profits  of	 the
subsequent years. Though the "firm tax" was levied under the
Finance Act  each year,	 it was	 a part	 and parcel  of	 the
incometax which	 was levied  under  the	 provisions  of	 the
Income-tax Act.	 If the	 contentions were  accepted it would
lead to an anomalous position inasmuch as there would be two
assessments  in	 the  case  of	registered  firms,  one	 for
purposes of levy of "firm tax" and the other for purposes of
levy of	 income-tax and	 the quantum  of income	 in the	 two
assessments  would  be	different.  Such  a  result  is	 not
contemplated under  the Incometax Act. Imposition of tax was
on the	registered firm as well as on unregistered firm. The
manner of  levy and  realisation is  different	in  case  of
registered firm.
     A case  converse to  the instant  case was	 before	 the
Division Bench	of the	Bombay High  Court in  the  case  of
Commissioner of	 Incometax, Bombay  City II  v.	 Estate	 and
Finance Ltd.,  111 I.T.R.  119.	 Where	the  Division  Bench
observed that  when enacting  the provision  regarding carry
forward and set off of unabsorbed depreciation under section
32(2) of  the Income-tax  Act, 1961,  the legislature  could
have imposed  a condition that unabsorbed depreciation could
be set	off against the profits of a subsequent year only if
the business  in relation  to which depreciation was allowed
continued to  exist in	such year.  The absence	 of  such  a
restriction had to be construed in favour of the assessee.
915
Where two  interpretations were	 possible the  court  should
take the  interpretation that  is favourable to the assessee
bearing in  mind that  a taxing	 statute is being construed.
Therefore, under  the provisions  of section  32(2) for	 the
purpose	 of  setting  off  unabsorbed  depreciation  carried
forward from  a proceeding  year, it  was not necessary that
the business  in respect of which the depreciation allowance
was originally worked out should remain in existence in such
succeeding year.  It dealt with some other aspect with which
we are not presently concerned.
     Having regard  to the scheme of the relevant provisions
and in view of the provisions of section 10(2)(vi) read with
section 24(1)  and section  24(2) of the 1922 Act, we are of
the  opinion   that  the   deduction   of   the	  unabsorbed
depreciation should  have been	allowed. It  is necessary to
bear in	 mind that in both the years the firm continued - in
one year it was unregistered, in the next year it got itself
transferred into  registered, but its identity was not lost.
The firm was one.
     In any  event as  has been	 mentioned in case of doubt,
the assessee  is entitled  to  an  interpretation  which  is
favourable to  him, though we are of the opinion that in the
instant case there is no scope of any doubt.
     Therefore, there  was no  loss of	the right  to  carry
forward the unabsorbed depreciation.
     In the premises the revenue was wrong, the assessee was
right. The  High Court	rightly answered  the question.	 The
appeals, therefore,  fail and are accordingly dismissed with
costs.
S.R.				     Appeals dismissed.
916




