

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Santosh Kumar & Ors vs Central Warehousing Corporation ... on 11 March, 1986Equivalent citations: 1986 AIR 1164, 1986 SCR  (1) 603
Author: O C Reddy
Bench: Reddy, O. Chinnappa (J)
           PETITIONER:
SANTOSH KUMAR & ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
CENTRAL WAREHOUSING CORPORATION & ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT11/03/1986

BENCH:
REDDY, O. CHINNAPPA (J)
BENCH:
REDDY, O. CHINNAPPA (J)
MADON, D.P.

CITATION:
 1986 AIR 1164		  1986 SCR  (1) 603
 1986 SCC  (2) 343	  1986 SCALE  (1)1265


ACT:
     Constitution of India, 1950 - Article 226.
     Land Acquisition  Act., 1894  - Sections 11, 18, 25 and
50(2).



HEADNOTE:
     Award of  Collector under	s.11 -	Whether	 Government,
Company or local authority can seek a reference under s. 18,
except on  grounds  of	fraud,	corruption  or	collusion  -
Whether petition  under Article	 226 filed  by Government or
anyone claiming	 through  it,  challenging  the	 Collector's
order declining to make reference under s.18 maintainable.
     Pursuant to  the awards  made under  s.11 of  the	Land
Acquisition Act,  1894	by  the	 Collector  determining	 the
compensation proposed  to be  paid  to	appellants  for	 the
acquisition of	their lands, the appellants sought reference
under s.18 for enhancement of compensation.
     The Central Ware-housing Corporation, at whose instance
the land  was acquired, also felt aggrieved by the amount of
compensation  determined  by  the  Collector  and  sought  a
reference to  the Civil	 Court under  s.18 for	reducing the
amount. The  Collector rejected	 this request  on the ground
that such  a reference	was barred by the proviso to s.50(2)
of the Act.
     In the writ petition under Article 226, the Corporation
challenged the	awards. The  High Court set aside the awards
and itself determined the compensation at a reduced rate.
     Allowing the appeals of the land-owners to this Court,
^
     HELD :  1. The High Court was wrong in entertaining the
writ petitions	challenging awards  made  by  the  Collector
under
604
the Land  Acquisition Act, 1894 and claiming that the amount
awarded was excessive. [609 F]
     2. The  scheme of	the Act	 is that,  apart from fraud,
corruption or  collusion, the amount of compensation awarded
by the	Collector under	 s.11 may  not be  questioned in any
proceeding either  by the  Government or  by the  Company or
Local Authority	 at whose  instance the acquisition is made.
Section 50(2)  and s.25	 lead to that inevitable conclusion.
What may not be done under the provisions of the Act may not
be permitted  to be done by invoking the jurisdiction of the
High Court  under Article  226. Article	 226 is not meant to
avoid or  circumvent  the  processes  of  the  law  and	 the
provisions of the statute. [607 E-G]
     3. When  s. 50(2)	expressly bars	the company or local
authority  at	whose  instance	 acquisition  is  made	from
demanding a  reference under  s.18 notwithstanding that such
company or local authority may be allowed to adduce evidence
before the Collector, and when s. 25 expressly prohibits the
Court from reducing the amount of compensation while dealing
with the reference under s.18, it is clearly not permissible
for  the   company  or	 local	authority   to	invoke	 the
jurisdiction  of   the	High  Court  under  Article  226  to
challenge  the	 amount	 to   compensation  awarded  by	 the
Collector and to have it reduced. [ 607 G-H; 608 A]
     4. The  Collector, in making an award, acts as an agent
of the Government, and the legal character of the award made
by the	Collector is  that of  a tender	 or offer  by him on
behalf of  the Government  and, therefore, the Government or
anyone who  could but  claim through  the Government  cannot
question  the	award  apart   from  fraud,   corruption  or
collusion. [608 C-E]
     Ezra v.  Secretary	 of  State  for	 India,	 (32  Indian
Appelas 93  = I.L.R.  32, Calcutta  605); Harish  Chandra v.
Deputy	Land  Acquisition  Officer,  [1962]  1	S.C.R.	676;
Mohammad Hasnuddin  v. State of Maharashtra, [1979] 2 S.C.R.
265 at	274; Municipal	Corporation of the City of Ahmedabad
v. Chandulal Shamaldas Patel & Ors., [1971] 2 SCC 821 relied
upon.
     Abdul Karim Allarkha v. State of Rajasthan, A.I.R. 1982
SC 61; Town Improvement Trust, Gwalior v. Sahajirao., A.I.R.
1978 MP 218 distinguished.
605



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION :  Civil Appeal Nos. 928-
930 of 1986.
     From the Judgment and Order dated 17th January, 1983 of
the Madhya  Pradesh High  Court in  Misc. Petition Nos. 397,
540 and 566 of 1980.
     L.N. Sinha,  T.U. Mehta, B.R.L. Iyengar and P.P. Juneja
for the Appellants.
     K.C. Mittal,  M.C. Bhandari,  Miss Asha  Rani Jain	 and
Tara Chand Sharma for the Respondents.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     CHINNAPPA REDDY,  J. These	 appeals by special leave of
this Court  raise the  same question  and may, therefore, be
disposed of  by	 a  common  judgment.  For  the	 purpose  of
constructing godowns for the Central Warehousing Corporation
and at	the instance  of  the  Corporation,  the  Collector,
Khandwa District published a notification under section 4 of
the Land  Acquisition Act  proposing to acquire certain land
belonging to the appellants. The declaration under section 6
was duly made and possession of the land was also taken from
the appellants.	 The Collector	made Awards under sec. 11 of
the Land  Acquisition Act  in  January	and  February,	1980
determining the	 compensation proposed	to be  paid  to	 the
appellants. The	 appellants sought references under s. 18 of
the Land Acquisition Act for enhancement of compensation and
we are told that the references are awaiting adjudication by
the Civil  Court. The  Central Warehousing  Corporation	 was
also aggrieved	by the	amount of compensation determined by
the Collector  and sought  a reference	to the	Civil  Court
under s.  18 of	 the Land  Acquisition Act  for reducing the
amount. The  Collector rejected	 the request  for  making  a
reference on  the ground that such a reference as was sought
by the	Central Warehousing  Corporation was  barred by	 the
proviso to  s. 50(2)  of the Land Acquisition Act. Thereupon
the Corporation	 filed writ  petitions under Art. 226 of the
Constitution in the High Court of Madhya Pradesh challenging
the awards.  The High  Court set aside the awards and itself
determined the compensation at a reduced rate. The
606
erstwhile owners  of  the  land	 have  filed  appeals  after
obtaining special  leave from  this Court  under Art. 136 of
the Constitution.
     The principal submission of the learned counsel for the
appellants was	that the  High Court  was wholly in error in
entertaining writ  petitions to challenge Awards made by the
Collector under	 the Land Acquisition Act on the ground that
the amount  awarded was	 excessive and	that too  not at the
instance of  the Government  but  at  the  instance  of	 the
Corporation at	whose request  the acquisition was made. The
learned counsel	 argued that  the  Award  of  the  Collector
constituted, in	 law, an  offer by  the Government  to pay a
certain price  for the	land proposed to be acquired. It was
open to	 the person  entitled to accept the determination by
the Collector  and receive  the compensation or to object to
the amount  determined by the Collector and seek a reference
to  the	  Civil	 Court	 for  proper  determination  of	 the
compensation. The Award by the Collector being in the nature
of an  offer by the Collector, there would be no question of
the  Collector	 or  the  Government  on  whose	 behalf	 the
acquisition was made challenging the award in any proceeding
by way	of reference  to the  Civil Court or otherwise. What
the Government	and the	 Collector were	 not entitled to do,
obviously, the	person at whose instance the acquisition was
made would  also not  be entitled  to do.  We have  no doubt
about the correctness of the submissions made by the learned
counsel for the appellants.
 Section 4	of the	Land  Acquisition  Act	enables	 the
Government, whenever  land is  needed for any public purpose
or for a company to publish a notification to that effect in
the  official	Gazette.  After	  hearing   objections,	  or
straightaway,  where  such  hearing  is	 dispensed  with  on
account of  urgency, the  Government is required by sec.6 of
the Act	 to make  a declaration	 that any particular land is
needed for a public purpose or for a company. Thereafter the
Collector is  required to  invite claims to compensation for
all interests  in such	land. The Collector is then required
by sec.11  of the Act to enquire into the objections and the
claims and  determine  and  apportion  the  compensation  by
making an  award. A  proviso added by way of an amendment in
1984 stipulates that no award shall be made by the Collector
without the  previous approval	of the	Government or of the
officer authorised by the Government in
607
that behalf.  Section 18  enables any  person interested who
has not accepted the award to require the Collector to refer
the matter  for the determination of the court, 'whether his
objection be  to the  measurement of the land, the amount of
the compensation,  the persons to whom it is payable, or the
apportionment  of   the	 compensation	among  the   persons
interested.' Here  we must  refer to s. 50(2) of the Act and
the proviso thereto which are as follows :-
	  "Section 50(2).  In any  proceeding held  before a
	  Collector  or	  Court	 in  such  cases  the  local
	  authority or	Company	 concerned  may	 appear	 and
	  adduce evidence for the purpose of determining the
	  amount of compensation.
	  Provided that	 no such  local authority or Company
	  shall be  entitled to	 demand	 a  reference  under
	  section 18."
Section	 25   further  prescribes   that   the	 amount	  of
compensation awarded by the court shall not be less than the
amount awarded	by the	Collector  under  s.11.	 Section  54
provides for  an appeal to the High Court from the award, or
from any  part of  the award,  of the  Court but it does not
prescribe who may appeal to the High Court.
     In our view there cannot be any possible doubt that the
scheme of  the Act  is that, apart from fraud, corruption or
collusion,  the	  amount  of  compensation  awarded  by	 the
Collector under	 s. 11	of the	Act may not be questioned in
any proceeding either by the Government or by the Company or
Local authority	 at whose  instance the acquisition is made.
Section 50(2)  and s. 25 lead to that inevitable conclusion.
Surely what  may not be done under the provisions of the Act
may not be permitted to be done by invoking the jurisdiction
of the	High Court  under Art. 226. Art. 226 is not meant to
avoid or  circumvent  the  processes  of  the  law  and	 the
provisions of  the statute. When s. 50(2) expressly bars the
company or local authority at whose instance the acquisition
is made	 from demanding	 a reference under s. 18 of the Act,
notwithstanding that  such Company or Local authority may be
allowed to adduce evidence before the Collector, and when s.
25 expressly prohibits the court from reducing the amount of
compensation while dealing
608
with  the   reference  under   s.  18,	it  is	clearly	 not
permissible for the company or local authority to invoke the
jurisdiction of	 the High  Court under Art. 226 to challenge
the amount  of compensation  awarded by the Collector and to
have it reduced.
     Long ago, it was held in Ezra v. Secretary of State for
India, 32 Indian Appeals 93 = I.L.R. 32, Calcutta 605 and it
has never been doubted since, 'that the 'Award' in which the
enquiry by  the	 Collector  results  is	 merely	 a  decision
(binding only  on the  Collector) as  to what  sum shall  be
tendered to  the owners	 of  the  lands'  and  that,  'if  a
judicial ascertainment	of value is desired by the owner, he
can obtain  it by requiring the matter to be referred by the
Collector to  the Court.'  As pointed  out by  this Court in
Harish Chandra	v. Deputy Land Acquisition Officer, [1962] 1
S.C.R. 676,  the observations of the Privy Council in Ezra's
case indicate  that the	 Collector, in making an award, acts
as an  agent of	 the Government and that the legal character
of the	award made  by the  Collector is that of a tender or
offer by  him on behalf of the Government (See also Mohammad
Hasnuddin v.  State of	Maharashtra), [1979] 2 S.C.R. 265 at
274. If	 the Collector	making an award was in law making an
offer on  behalf of  the  Government,  it  is  difficult  to
appreciate how	the Government or anyone who could but claim
through the  Government would  be entitled  to question	 the
award, apart from fraud, corruption or collusion.
     The learned  counsel for  the respondents	invited	 our
attention to  Abdul Karim  Allarkha v.	State of  Rajasthan,
A.I.R. 1982 S.C. 61 to urge that "a reference may be had not
only at	 the instance  of a  person interested,	 who has not
accepted the  award or	the amount  thereof, but also at the
instance of  the authority  acquiring the  land, that is, on
whose behalf  or the  company for  which the  acquisition is
being made. "The decision in this case turned on the express
provisions of the Rajasthan Land Acquisition Act, sec. 18(1)
of which  expressly enabled 'the State Government department
on whose  behalf or  the company  for which  acquisition  is
being made or any person interested who has not accepted the
award  to  make	 a  written  application  to  the  Collector
requiring that	the matter  be referred by the Collector for
the determination  of the Court. This case is, therefore, of
no assistance  whatsoever to  the respondents.	The  learned
counsel for  the respondents also drew our attention to Town
Improvement Trust,
609
Gwalior v.  Sahajirao, A.I.R. 1978 M.P. 218. The decision in
the case  turned upon  an interpretation  of the  expression
'person	 interested'   defined	in   sec.3(b)  of  the	Land
Acquisition Act.  In the  first place,	we are not satisfied
that the  definition is	 capable of  the wide interpretation
given by  the learned  judges and  in the  second place, the
question  does	not  really  turn  on  the  meaning  of	 the
expression 'person  interested', but  turns on the scheme of
the Act and the scope of sections 25 and 50(2) of the Act
     On the  other hand,  the decision	of this court in the
Municipal Corporation  of the City of Ahemdabad v. Chandulal
Shamaldas Patel	 & Ors.,  [1971] 3 S.C.C. 821 appears to run
along the  same lines  as that indicated by us. In that case
certain	 lands	 belonging  to	the  first  respondent	were
notified for  acquisition by  the Government  of Bombay "for
school	and   neighbourhood  work".   The  first  respondent
challenged the notification for acquisition by filing a writ
petition in the High Court of Gujarat which was allowed. The
Municipal Corporation  of Ahmedabad  preferred an  appeal to
the  Supreme  Court.  A	 preliminary  objection	 was  raised
regarding the maintainability of the appeal by the Municipal
Corporation and	 the objection	was sought  to be met on the
plea that  the acquisition  was for the use of the Municipal
Corporation. The  court	 upheld	 the  preliminary  objection
observing, "The	 property, it  is  true,  was  notified	 for
acquisition by	the State  Government for  the	use  of	 the
Municipal  Corporation	 after	it   was  acquired   by	 the
Government, but	 that, in  our judgment,  did not confer any
interest in  the Municipal Corporation so as to enable it to
file an	 appeal against the order of the High Court allowing
the petition".	We are,	 therefore, firmly  of the view that
the High  Court was  wrong in  entertaining  writ  petitions
challenging awards  made by  the Collector  under  the	Land
Acquisition Act	 and claiming  that the	 amount awarded	 was
excessive. The	appeals are  allowed with costs and the writ
petitions filed in the High Court are dismissed.
A.P.J.					    Appeals allowed.
610




