

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Ashok Kumar Mittal vs Maruti Udyog Ltd. & Anr on 7 March, 1986Equivalent citations: 1986 AIR 1923, 1986 SCR  (1) 585
Author: V Tulzapurkar
Bench: Tulzapurkar, V.D.
           PETITIONER:
ASHOK KUMAR MITTAL

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
MARUTI UDYOG LTD. & ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT07/03/1986

BENCH:
TULZAPURKAR, V.D.
BENCH:
TULZAPURKAR, V.D.
SEN, A.P. (J)

CITATION:
 1986 AIR 1923		  1986 SCR  (1) 585
 1986 SCC  (2) 293	  1986 SCALE  (1)326


ACT:
     Justice in Public Interest - Power of the Supreme Court
to issue  directions or	 orders -  Out-of-turn allotment  of
Maruti Cars  out of manufacturer's discretionary quota of 5%
to  several   categories  like	 defence,  VIPs,   judiciary
including lawyers  etc. - Whether the method adopted, namely
(a) for the promotion of commercial interest of the company;
(b) for	 the promotion of public interest; and (c) avoidance
of undue  individual hardships	etc. violative of Article 14
of the	Constitution  and  arbitrary  -	 Guidelines  by	 the
Supreme Court.



HEADNOTE:
     The petitioner  applied for  allotment of	"Maruti	 Car
800" and  due to  an error  of the computer his name was not
included for  the allotment  of "Maruti 800" but for "Maruti
Truck". When  the petitioer  pointed out the discrepency the
error was accepted by the respondents who however, agreed to
consider the case of the petitioner for allotment out of the
manufacturers' discretionary  quota of	5%. Accordingly, the
petitioner was	alloted Serial	No.8 under the discretionary
quota. In  the course  of certain correspondence that ensued
between the  petitioner and  the respondent, the respondents
indicated the  usual guidelines	 adopted in the allotment of
the car	 out of	 the manufacturers'  discretionary quota  to
defence forces,	 judiciary, Constitutional  heads, MPs	etc.
The petitioner	has  challenged	 such  a  classification  as
arbitrary and  violative of the provisions of the Article 14
of the Constitution.
     Disposing of the petitions,
^
     HELD :  The interest  of justice  would be	 met, if the
allotment  of	Maruti	vehicles   out	 of   manufacturers'
discretionary  quota   is  made	  in  favour  of  the  named
categories specified  in the  order and	 subject  to  strict
observance of the conditions indicated therein. [586 E-F]
586
     (The Court	 ordered that  the guidelines  would  be  in
force for  a period  of three  years and  will be subject to
review	later	taking	into  consideration  the  prevailing
circumstances  which  may  exist  at  that  point  of  time.
Applying non-liquet for the present, the Court left open the
several contentions raised in the petitions.)



JUDGMENT:
     ORIGINAL JURISDICTION  : Writ  Petition (Civil) No. 588
and 11716 of 1984.
     Under Article 32 of the Constitution of India.
     Soli J.  Sorabji, Prashant	 Desai and R. N. Karanjawala
for the Petitioners.
     K. Parasaran,  Attorney General,  Mrs.  Vijay  Rao	 and
T.V.S.N. Chari for the Respondents.
     The Order of the Court was delivered by
     TULZAPURKAR, J. We have heard Mr. Soli J. Sorabjee, Mr.
Prashant Bhushan  and Mr. R. Karanjawala for the petitioners
and  the   learned  Attorney-General,	on  behalf   of	 the
respondents. Various  submissions were made on behalf of the
parties.  After	 consideration	discussion  of	the  various
proposals and  suggestions made	 by parties and after having
given our anxious and deep consideration to the matter it is
ordered that  in public	 interest the  following  guidelines
should regulate	 the allotment of Maruti vehicles out of the
manufacturers quota of 5 per cent.
     The  allotment   of  Maruti   vehicles   out   of	 the
manufacturers' quota of five per cent will be made in favour
of the following categories only:
     I.	 Any   organisation/institution	 coming	 within	 the
definition of  'State' under  Article 12 of the Constitution
of India.
     II. Any  hospital or recognised charitable organisatior
or educational institutions registered or incorporated under
a statute  or having  recognition under	 Section 80-G of the
Indian Income Tax Act, 1961.
587
     III. Individuals
     a. An individual suffering from physical handicap so as
to render  him incapable  of using public transport would be
eligible for allotment provided his income together with the
income of  his or her spouse or his or her guardian does not
exceed Rs. 60,000 per year.
     b. The  President of  India, Vice-President  of  India,
Cabinet Ministers,  Ministers of  State in the Union Cabinet
and Governors  of States  and  Cabinet	Ministers  in  State
Governments, the  Chairman of the Public Service Commission,
the Chief Election Commissioner, the Auditor and Comptroller
General of India and the Attorney General of India.
     c. The Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the Lok Sabha,
the Chairman  and the  Deputy Chairman	of the	Rajya Sabha,
Speakers of  State Legislative	Assemblies, Chairpersons  of
State  Legislative   Councils,	and  Leaders  of  Opposition
parties in Parliament and in the State Legislatures.
     d. The  Chief Justice  and other  Judges of the Supreme
Court and  the Chief  Justice and  other Judges	 of the High
Courts.
     e. Public	servants not  below the	 rank of  Additional
Secretary to the Government of India.
     f. Serving	 members of  the Armed	Forces not below the
rank of Brigadier in the Army or equivalent rank in the Navy
or the Air Force;
     g. manufacturers  of component parts for utilisation in
the manufacture	 of Maruti  vehicles.  The  number  of	this
category will be restricted to ten per year;
     h. employees  of Maruti  Udyog Ltd.,  limited to  fifty
vehicles per year;
     i. individuals  in	 recognition  of  their	 outstanding
humanitarian services  to the  society or to the Nation. The
number in this category will be restricted to ten per year;
588
     j. individuals  cases of undue hardship on humanitarian
grounds. The  number in	 this category will be restricted to
five per year.
IV.  Error category  i.e. individuals whose applications for
regular allotment  could not be registered on account of any
genuine error.
	  The following conditions will be strictly observed
in     the	allotment     of     vehicles	  to	 any
organisation/institution, person or individual in any of the
aforesaid categories:
     a. There  will be	no resale  of  the  vehicle  by	 the
allottee for a period of three years.
     This  condition  will  be	inserted  in  the  order  of
allotment issued  in favour  of the  allottee. Maruti  Udyog
Ltd. will  further obtain  before  giving  delivery  of	 the
vehicle a written undertaking from the allottee that he will
not sell  the vehicle  for a  period of three years from the
date of delivery.
     b. There  will  be	 no  second  allotment	out  of	 the
manufacturers' quota to the same individual.
     c. In  each of  the aforesaid  categories allotment, as
far as	possible, will	be made	 on first  come first served
basis in  accordance with  the date  of the  receipt of	 the
application   for    allotment	 out	of   the   aforesaid
manufacturers'	quota.	 In  cases   where  more   than	 one
application is	received on the same day from individuals in
the same  category, priority of allotment in such cases will
be determined by draw of lots under proper supervision.
     It	  is	clarified   that    allotments	 made	 for
military/paramilitary  purposes	  and  against	firm  export
orders for  supply outside  of India,  will not	 be included
within 5% of the Manufacturers' quota.
     These guidelines will be in force for a period of three
years  and   will  be	subject	 to   review   taking	into
consideration the  prevailing circumstances  which may exist
at that point of time.
589
     In view  of the  aforesaid guidelines,  we think, it is
unnecessary for	 us to determine the various submissions and
contentions raised  on	behalf	of  the	 parties  which	 are
however left open.
     All  general   interim  orders  are  vacated.  However,
deliveries made pursuant to our interim orders will stand.
     Liberty to apply.
S.R.
590
