

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Cantonment Board,Dehu Road & Anr vs Mahindra Owen Ltd. & Anr on 31 March, 1986Equivalent citations: 1986 AIR 1114, 1986 SCR  (1) 961
Author: V B Eradi
Bench: Eradi, V. Balakrishna (J)
           PETITIONER:
CANTONMENT BOARD,DEHU ROAD & ANR.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
MAHINDRA OWEN LTD. & ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT31/03/1986

BENCH:
ERADI, V. BALAKRISHNA (J)
BENCH:
ERADI, V. BALAKRISHNA (J)
MADON, D.P.

CITATION:
 1986 AIR 1114		  1986 SCR  (1) 961
 1986 SCC  Supl.  301	  1986 SCALE  (1)633


ACT:
     The Bombay	 Cantonment Board Act read with Notification
No.SRO 318 dated 29.10.59 - Items 3, 11, 14 and 16(b) of the
First Schedule	thereto, scope	of -  Whether  trailers	 and
water tankers manufactured by the Respondent and supplied to
the Defence  Department falls  under the  aforesaid items  -
Whether the  levy of  octroi duty is illegal, in view of the
specific provision (vi) contained in Schedule II.



HEADNOTE:
     The first	respondent company manufactures trailers ant
water tankers  at its  factory at  Pimpri in the District of
Poone. Pursuant	 to the	 acceptance of the tenders submitted
to the	Defence Department  of the Union of India, the first
respondent sold	 different quantities  of 100  C.W.D. ant 10
C.W.D. trailers	 and two-wheeled  water tankers.  Under	 the
terms  of   the	 contract,   the  ownership  passed  to	 the
Government of  India on inspection of the goods at the first
respondent's factory  premises at  Pimpri and  appropriation
thereof to  the contract consequent on approval of the goods
but delivery  was to  be effected  by the  company  free  of
charge within the cantonment limits of Dehu Road.
     The first	appellant Board	 claimed from the respondent
company payment of octroi-duty aggregating Rs.3,37,628-08 on
the  trailers/water  tankers  so  supplied  to	the  Defence
Department. In	the appeal preferred by the first respondent
under section 84 of the Cantonment Boards' Act, the District
Magistrate held that the trailers/water tankers supplied did
not fall  within the scope of any of the items enumerated in
the First Schedule to the Notification No. SRO 318 Dt.
29.10.59 and therefore the levy of octroi-duty was illegal.
The appellants	preferred a  batch of  Writ Petitions before
the  High   Court  which   were	 dismissed   upholding	 the
Magistrate's  judgment.	 Hence	the  appeal  by	 certificate
granted by the Bombay High Court under Article 133(1)(a) ant
(c) of the Constitution.
962
     Dismissing the appeals, the Court,
^
     HELD 1.1  None of	the items 3, ll, 14 and 16(b) of the
First Schedule	to the	Notification No SRO 318 dt 29 .10.59
will take  within its  scope the  trailers/water tankers  in
respect of  which the  notices of demand of octroi-duty were
issued to  the first  respondent company. The imposition and
demand of  the octroi  duty in	relation to  them was wholly
unwarranted. Entry  No.3 read  as  a  whole  contains  clear
indication of  the nature  and type of the articles intended
to be  comprehended by	the  description  "All	articles  of
Galvanised, Iron  or steel".  Entries 11  and 14  deal	with
"machinery" and "machines" and the trailers/water tankers by
themselves cannot  be regarded	as "machinery" or "machines"
Under Entry  16(b), they cannot be regarded as "accessories"
of conveyance either. [965 E; 966 C-G]
     1.2 Even  if it  is assumed  that any of the entries in
the  First  Schedule  to  the  Notification  did  cover	 the
trailers/ water	 tankers, the levy of octroi duty in respect
of them	 would still  be illegal  in view  of clause (vi) of
Schedule II  to the  Notification since no octroi duty shall
be levied on "Military Stores" etc. [966 G-H 967 A]
      1.3  The expression "Military Stores" used in Schedule
II is  comprehensive enough  to cover articles essential for
military use  inclusive of  trailers/water tankers' supplies
of which  are accumulated  in the depot for being drawn upon
when ever  needed The  matter is  placed beyond doubt by the
significant fact  that in  the Schedule to the acceptance of
tenders Annexure  'A', pursuant to which the trailers/water-
tankers were supplied, paragraph 12 which contains "despatch
instructions"  specifically  refers  to	 the  trailers/water
tankers as  'stores'. Further,	as per	the tender terms the
trailers/water tankers supplied to the Defence Department of
the Government	of India,  had become  the property  of	 the
Defence Department  even prior	to their entry into the Dehu
Road   cantonment    Board   The    requirement	   regarding
certification  by   the	 Superintendent	 of  Police  has  no
application in	respect of  the "Military Stores". [967 G-H;
968 A-C]
963



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION :  Civil Appeal  Nos. 48,
362 to 379 of 1972.
     From the Judgment and Decree dated 23/24.11.1970 of the
Bombay High Court in Special Civil Appln. No. 2217 of 1969.
     V.M. Tarkunde and K.L. Hathi for the Appellants.
     F.J.S. Talyarkhan, B.H. Wahi, A.N. Haksar, P.K. Ram, A.
Narayan and S. Sukumsran for the Respondents.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     BALAKRISHNA ERADI,	 J. These  appeals which  have	been
filed on  the strength	of a certificate dated September 14,
1971 granted  by the  High Court  of  Bombay  under  Article
133(1)(a) and  (c) of  the Constitution of India, as it then
stood, are  directed against  the judgment of the High Court
of Bombay dated November 23, 1970 dismissing a batch of Writ
Petitions filed	 by the	 appellants herein  challenging	 the
order dated  May 23, 1969 passed by the District Magistrate,
Poone setting  aside the  notices of  demand of	 Octroi Duty
issued by the appellants to the first respondent-company.
     The first	appellant herein  is the  Cantonment  Board,
Dehu Road and the second appellant is its Executive Officer.
The  first   respondent	 is   a	  public   limited   company
manufacturing trailers	and water  tankers at its factory at
Pimpri in  the District	 of Poone.  The first respondent had
submitted tenders  to the Defence Department of the Union of
India for  the manufacture  and supply of trailers and water
tankers. Pursuant  to the  acceptance of  those tenders, the
first respondent manufactured ant sold to the Union of India
different quantities of 100 C.W.D and 10 C.W.D. trailers and
two-wheeled water  tankers. Under  the terms of the contract
the  ownership	 passed	 to   the  Government  of  India  on
inspection of  the goods  at the  first respondent's factory
premises at Pimpri and appropriation thereof to the contract
consequent on  approval of  the goods but delivery was to be
effected by  the first	respondent-company  free  of  charge
within the  Cantonment limits  of Dehu Road. Accordingly, by
June-July, 1965, 8,953 trailers/water tankers were delivered
by the first respondent
964
company	 within	  the  limits	of  the	  Cantonment  Board.
Thereafter, 682	 more such  trailers/water tankers were also
delivered by  the first	 respondent-company to	the  Defence
Authorities within  the Dehu  Road Cantonment  limits during
1965 and 1966.
     Under the	provisions of  the Cantonment Board Act, the
appellant Board	 with the  previous sanction  of the Central
Government could  impose Octroi	 Duty in respect of articles
brought into  the limits  of the  Cantonment Board.  Under a
Notification dated  October 29,	 1959, bearing	No. SRO 318,
the first  appellant imposed a non-refundable Octroi Duty in
respect	 of  articles  brought	within	the  limits  of	 the
Cantonment Board,  for consumption,  use or  sale therein st
the rates specified in the First Schedule.
     Based on the aforesaid Notification the first appellant
demanded from the first respondent-company payment of Octroi
Duty on the trailers/water tankers which were brought within
the limits  of the  Cantonment Board.  The total  amount  so
claim  ed  from	 the  first  respondent	 aggregated  to	 Rs.
3,37,628.08. Out  of the  said amount,	the first respondent
paid Rs.3,18,620.08  under protest,  and approached the High
Court of  Bombay by filing Special Civil Application No.1720
of 1966	 challenging the  notices of  demand and praying for
directions being  issued to  the first	appellant  Board  to
cancel or  withdraw the	 notices of demand and to refund the
amount	of  Octroi  Duty  already  paid	 under	protest.  On
November 29,  1968, the	 High Court  dismissed the said Writ
Petition on  the ground	 that the  matter involved  disputed
question of  facts and	hence the  first  respondent  should
exhaust his  alternate remedy  by referring an appeal to the
District Magistrate  before seeking relief under Article 226
of the Constitution.
     The  first	  respondent-company  thereafter   preferred
appeals before	the District Magistrate, Poone under-Section
84  of	 the  Cantonment  Board's  Act	with  a	 prayer	 for
condonation of the delay in filing the appeals. The District
Magistrate granted  the prayer	for condonation of delay and
by a  very detailed  order allowed  the appeals holding that
the trailers/  water tankers  manufactured and	delivered by
the first  respondent-company did  not fall within the scope
of any	of the	items enumerated  in the 1st Schedule to the
Notification authorising  the levy  of Octroi Duty and hence
the action of
965
the appellants	in demanding  the payment  of Octroi Duty in
respect of  them was  illegal. He accordingly, set aside the
notices of  demand and directed the appellants to refund the
amount of  Duty already	 collected from the first respondent
company.
     Aggrieved by the said decision the appellants preferred
a batch	 of Writ Petitions before the High Court challenging
the legality  and correctness  of the aforesaid order passed
by  the	 District  Magistrate.	Those  Writ  Petitions	were
dismissed by the High Court under the impugned judgment. The
High Court  has upheld	the view  expressed by	the District
Magistrate that	 the trailers/water  tankers  did  not	fall
within the scope of any of the entries in the First Schedule
to the Notification authorising the levy of Octroi Duty. The
correctness of	the conclusion so recorded by the High Court
is challenged by the appellants in these appeals.
     Having given our careful consideration to the arguments
advanced by  the learned Counsel appearing on both sides, we
have unhesitatingly  come to the conclusion that there is no
merit in  these appeals	 and that  the decision	 of the High
Court does not call for any interference.
     The entries  in the  First Schedule to the Notification
which were  relied on  by the High Court are those appearing
as Item	 Nos.  3,  11,	14  and	 16(b).	 Those	entries	 are
respectively in the following terms :-
	  "3. All articles of Galvanised iron, or steel such
	  as All  Machinery parts,  Buckets, channels,	Iron
	  Utensils, Karahi  tubs, Ordinary  country weighing
	  scales pipes,	 safes, springs,  suit cases, tanks,
	  tin, containers,  trunks, tubs  and wheels  of all
	  vehicles (except those specified elsewhere), Axle,
	  Chassis, Heavy  iron chains,	Wire and Wire ropes,
	  hardwares such  as  barbed  wires,  bolts,  files,
	  Hammers,  Hinges,   Nails,  Nuts,  pipes,  Pliers,
	  Rivets,  Saws,   Screws,  Tools,   Washers,	Wire
	  Nettings, Wrench  etc. (Excepting articles of cast
	  iron and those mentioned elsewhere).
966
	  11.  All   kinds  of	 machinery  (not   specified
	  elsewhere.
	  14. All other machines (not specified elsewhere).
	  16. Vehicles:
	       ...	      ...	      ....
	  (b) All parts and accessories of Motor cars, Motor
	  trucks  or   similar	conveyances   except  axles,
	  chassis, rubber  solution, springs,  tubes,  tyres
	  and wheels."
     Entry No.3 read as a whole contains clear indication of
the  nature   and  type	 of  the  articles  intended  to  be
comprehended by the description "All articles of Galvanised,
Iron or	 Steel". In our opinion the High Court was perfectly
right  in   its	 view	that  the   trailers/water   tankers
manufactured and  delivered by	the first respondent-company
did not	 fall within  the scope	 of the	 said entry. Entries
Nos. 11	 and 14	 deal with  'machinery' and  'machines'	 and
those  entries	 also  will  not  take	within	their  scope
trailers/water tankers,	 since, by themselves they cannot be
regarded as either machinery or machines. While dealing with
entry No. 16(b), the High Court has dwelt in detail upon the
exact nature  of the  trailers/water tankers manufactured by
the appellants	and the	 uses to  which they  are  put,	 and
expressed  the	 view  that   they  cannot  be	regarded  as
"accessories" of  conveyances. We  are in agreement with the
said view expressed by the High Court.
     Thus the  position that  emerges is  that none  of	 the
aforesaid entries  contain in  the  First  Schedule  to	 the
Notification relied  on by  the appellants  will take within
its scope the trailers/water tankers in respect of which the
notices of  demand of  Octroi Duty  were issued to the first
respondent-company. The imposition and demand of Octroi Duty
in relation to them was hence wholly unwarranted.
     Quite apart from what has been stated above, even if it
is assumed for purpose of discussion that any of the entries
in the	First Schedule	to the	Notification did  cover	 the
trailers/water tankers,	 the levy  of Octroi Duty in respect
of
967
them  would  still  be	illegal	 in  view  of  the  specific
provision contained  in Schedule II to the Notification that
-
	  "No Octroi shall be levied on
	  (vi) Military	 Stroes ant other articles of Police
	  equipment pertaining to uniforms including similar
	  articles of National Volunteer Corps and equipment
	  of  Police   Radio  Service;	provided  that	each
	  consignment is  certified by the Superintendent of
	  Police of the district concerned or in the case of
	  National Volunteer  Corps by an Officer authorised
	  by the  State Commandant, National Volunteer Corps
	  in this  behalf, to  be the property of Government
	  in the Police Department."
It has	been found  by the District Magistrate as well as by
the High Court that the trailers/water tankers were supplied
to the	Defence Department  of the  Government of  India and
that they  had become  the property  of	 Defence  Department
prior to their entry into the Dehu Road Cantonment Board.
     The  expression   "stores"	 has  been  defined  in	 the
Dictionaries as meaning -
	  "Articles  of	  particular  kind  or	for  special
	  purpose accumulated  far  use,  supply  of  things
	  needed, (military,  naval etc.)  " -The    Concise
	  Oxford Dictionary.
	  "Supply or  stock of	something, especially essen-
	  tials,  for	a  specific   purpose:	the   ship's
	  stores."Collins English Dictionary.
	  "Supplies of	provisions, ammunition	etc. for  an
	  army,	 ship	etc."  Chambers	  Twentieth  Century
	  Dictionary. G
     In our opinion the expression "military stores" used in
Schedule  II  is  comprehensive	 enough	 to  cover  articles
essential  for	military  use  inclusive  of  trailers/water
tankers supplies  of which  are accumulated in the depot for
being drawn  upon whenever  needed.  The  matter  is  placed
beyond doubt by the
968
significant fact  that in  the Schedule to the acceptance of
tenders - Annexure 'A', pursuant to which the trailers/water
tankers were supplied, paragraph 12 which contains "despatch
instructions"  specifically  refers  to	 the  trailers/water
tankers as stores while stating thus:
	  "The stores  after inspection will be delivered at
	  Vehicle Depot, Dehu."
The   requirement    regarding	  certification	   by	 the
Superintendent of  Police has  no application  in respect of
"military  stores".The	exemption  provision  was  therefore
clearly attracted  and	the  levy  of  Octroi  Duty  on	 the
trailers/water tankers was clearly illegal.
     These appeals  are, therefore, devoid of merit and they
will accordingly  stand dismissed.  The	 parties  will	bear
their respective costs.
S.R.				   Appeals dismissed.
969




