

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
M. Satyanarayana vs The State Of Karnataka & Anr on 12 March, 1986Equivalent citations: 1986 AIR 1162, 1986 SCR  (1) 692
Author: S Mukharji
Bench: Mukharji, Sabyasachi (J)
           PETITIONER:
M. SATYANARAYANA

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
THE STATE OF KARNATAKA & ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT12/03/1986

BENCH:
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)
BENCH:
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)
SINGH, K.N. (J)

CITATION:
 1986 AIR 1162		  1986 SCR  (1) 692
 1986 SCC  (2) 512	  1986 SCALE  (1)564


ACT:
     A. Supreme	 Court Rules 1966 Rule 5A of order XV - When
the  certificate  issued  under	 Article  133(1)(b)  of	 the
Constitution by	 the High  Court is unwarranted on the facts
of the	case the  certificate must be revoked and the appeal
be dismissed.
     B. Construction  of a statute, explained - Construction
of the word "and" in clause (iii) of Rule 4 of the Karnataka
Medical Colleges  (Selection of	 Candidates  for  Admission)
Rules 1984  explained  -  Subb-clause  (a)  cannot  be	read
independently of sub-clause (b).



HEADNOTE:
     The  appellant  who  is  a	 student  of  some  academic
distinction and	 ability sought admission to the Ist year of
MBBS Course  under the	special category  being a  son of  a
freedom fighter	 or political sufferer within the meaning of
clause (iii)  of Rule  4 of  the Karnataka  Medical Colleges
(Selection of  Candidates for Admission), Rules 1984 who had
participated in	 1942 Movement	and was imprisoned from 10th
of September, 1942 to 2nd of October, 1942. Since he was not
granted admission  under that  category,  he  filed  a	writ
petition before	 the Karnataka	High Court  contending	that
sub-clause (a)	of clause  (iii) of Rule 4 of the 1984 Rules
should be  read independently  as well as sub-clause (b) not
only of	 each other  but also what follows by way of proviso
though not  so mentioned.  Both	 the  Writ  Petition  and  a
further	 appeal	  to  the  Division  Bench  were  dismissed.
However, the  High Court granted a certificate under Article
133(1)(b) of the Constitution.
     Dismissing the appeal, the Court,
^
     HELD :  1. Under  Rule 5A	of Order  XV of	 the Supreme
Court Rules,  1966 when	 a party  to whom  a certificate  of
fitness to  appeal has	been granted  by the High Court, the
Supreme Court
693
may, either  dismiss it	 summarily or direct issue of notice
to all	necessary parties  or may  make such  orders as	 the
circumstances of  the case  may require.  In this  case	 the
question involved  is a simple one and the intention and the
purpose	 of   Rule  4  of  the	Karnataka  Medical  Colleges
(Selection  of	Candidates  for	 Admission)  Rules  1984  is
manifest and  in the  language there  is no  difficulty. The
certificate under  Article 133(i)(b)  of the Constitution to
the effect  that in  the opinion of the Karnataka High Court
the question  involved needs  to be  decided by	 the Supreme
Court is unwarranted. [696 D-E]
     2.1 A statute cannot be construed merely with reference
to grammer.  Statute, whenever the language permits, must be
construed reasonably  and rationally  to give  effect to the
intention and  purpose of  the legislature.  The  expression
"and" in  clause (iii)	of Rule	 4 has	generally cumulative
effect requiring  the fulfilment  of all the conditions that
it joins  together and	it is  the antithesis  of "or".	 The
expression  "and"  in  the  instant  case,  cannot  be	read
disjunctively. [696 C-D]
     A.K. Gopalan  v. The  State of Madras, [1950] S.C.R. 88
at 126; and Ishwar Singh Bindra & Ors. v. The State of U.P.,
[1969] 1 S.C.R. 219 applied.
     2.2 It  is not  possible to  hold that  sub-clause	 (a)
should be  read independently  of  sub-clause  (b).  If	 the
expression "and"  in clause  (a) is  read independently then
there was  no need  for	 him  to  suffer  at  all  and	mere
participation would  be	 enough	 to  make  him	a  political
sufferer. If  it were  to be  held so  it would	 defeat	 the
rationale the  Rule  4	defining  a  political	sufferer  or
freedom fighter in the Rules. [695 G-H; 696 C]



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION : Civil Appeal No. 600 of
1986.
     From the  Judgment and  Order dated  2.12.1985  of	 the
Karnataka High Court in Writ Appeal No. 2665 of 1985.
     P.R. Ramasesh for the Appellant.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
694
     SABYASACHI	 MUKHARJI,   J.	 This	is  an	 appeal	  by
certificate under  article 133	(1)(b) of  the	Constitution
from the decision of the Division Bench of the High Court of
Karnataka dismissing  the appeal against the judgment of the
learned single	Judge of  that	High  Court.  The  appellant
herein who  is a  student of  some academic  distinction and
ability sought	admission to the 1st year of M.B.B.S. Course
to the	Directorate of	Medical	 Education,  Karnataka.	 The
appellant was an applicant to one of the Government seats in
the Medical Colleges managed by the Government or one of the
seats to which the Government was entitled to in the private
medical colleges.
     The  appellant  was  seeking  admission  under  special
category reserved for sons of political sufferers or freedom
fighters. The  relevant rule  is Rule  4  of  the  Karnataka
Medical Colleges  (Selection of	 Candidates  for  Admission)
Rules 1984.  Note (iii)	 of the	 said  Rule  has  defined  a
political Sufferer or Freedom Fighter as follows :
	  "A person
	  (a) who prior to 15th August, 1947 participated in
	  the National	Movement for  the  emanicipation  of
	  India,  that	 is  in	  the  struggle	 for  Indian
	  Independence; and
	  (b) who  even after 15th August, 1947 participated
	  in the struggle in any princely State for securing
	  accession of	such State  to the  then dominion of
	  India, who on account of such participation -
	  (i) has  suffered imprisonment  or detention for a
	  period of  not less  than three  months, the	said
	  period being	calculated taking  into account	 the
	  period of  remission, if  any,  granted  for	good
	  conduct, other like reasons; or
	  (ii) has been awarded capital punishment; or
	  (iii)	 had   died  while  undergoing	sentence  or
	  detention; or
	  (iv)	 was	killed	 or    became	 permanently
	  incapacitated by  Police  or	Military  firing  or
	  lathi charge; or
695
	  (v) lost  his job,  property	or  other  means  of
	  livelihood;
	  (vi) where  certificates of  imprisonment are	 not
	  available due to records being destroyed, etc., an
	  affidavit by	the  political	sufferer  about	 his
	  imprisonment supported  by a	certificate  from  a
	  Member of  Parliament or  a Member  of  the  State
	  Legislature,	who   has  been	 in  jail  with	 him
	  specifying the  period of  imprisonment  would  be
	  accepted."
     The case  of the  appellant was  that  his	 father	 had
participated in	 1942 Movement	and was imprisoned from 10th
of September, 1942 to 2nd of October, 1942. His further case
is that	 because of  the aforesaid  participation, his grand
father i.e.  father of	the appellant's	 father, was annoyed
and turned  him out  of the  house and	so the father of the
appellant could	 not pursue  his studies and therefore could
not qualify himself well for good job. The appellant claimed
admission on  the ground of being a son of a freedom fighter
or political  sufferer and  that he  belongs  to  a  special
category and should be treated as such. It is contended that
sub-clause (a)	of clause  (iii) of  the note 4 of the Rules
should be  read independently  as well as sub-clause (b) not
only of	 each other  but also what follows by way of proviso
though not  so mentioned.  The learned	judge was  unable to
accept that  contention. The  division Bench  accepted	this
view of the learned single Judge.
     Reservations in  favour of	 sons of political sufferers
are considered	to be belonging to a special category. There
is rationale  behind it.  Those who  are political sufferers
undergo certain disadvantages and pass on such disadvantages
to their children. They will be in a worse position than the
children of  those who	are not	 political sufferers for the
purpose of taking adequate education, attention etc. because
their parents  might have  languished in any prison or might
have been deprived of property. Looked at from that point of
view, political	 sufferer should  be an	 identifiable person
who could  be recognised  as such on certain rational basis.
It is,	therefore, manifest  that a person to be a political
sufferer must  have suffered  in any  one of  the five	ways
stated in sub-clause (i) to (v) of clause (b).
696
     If	 the   expression  'and'   in  clause  (a)  is	read
independently then  there was  no need	for him to suffer at
all and	 mere participation  would be  enough to  make him a
political sufferer.  That would	 defeat the rationale behind
the rule.  It would,  therefore, frustrate the intention and
purpose of  the legislature.  The expression  'and' in these
circumstances  cannot  be  read	 disjunctively.	 It  is	 not
possible  to   hold  that  sub-clause  (a)  should  be	read
independently  of   sub-clause	(b).  A	 statute  cannot  be
construed merely with reference to grammar. Statute whenever
the  language  permits	must  be  construed  reasonably	 and
rationally to  give effect  to the  intention and purpose of
the  legislature.  The	expression  'and'  has	generally  a
cumulative effect,  requiring  the  fulfilment	of  all	 the
conditions that	 it joins  together and it is the antithesis
of 'or'.  In this  connection reference	 may be made to A.K.
Gopalan v. The State of Madras, [1950] S.C.R. 88 at 126. See
also the observations of this Court in Ishwar Singh Bindra &
Ors. v. The State of U.P., [1969] 1 S.C.R. 219.
     This construction,	 put by	 High Court, in our opinion,
is logical  and reasonable  construction. The  High Court as
mentioned  hereinbefore	 has  granted  a  certificate  under
article 133  (1)(b) of	the Constitution.  We find  that the
question is  a simple  one and the intention and the purpose
of the	rule is	 manifest and  in the  language, there is no
difficulty. The	 certificate under article 133 (1)(b) of the
Constitution, in our opinion, was therefore unwarranted. We,
therefore, revoke  the certificate  and dismiss	 the  appeal
summarily under	 Rule 5-A  of Order  XV of the Supreme Court
Rules, 1966.  We, however, make it clear that the appellant,
the student  in question,  is a	 student of  some credit and
distinction and	 has  obtained	74%  of	 the  marks  in	 his
examination. His  case should  be considered  favourably and
objectively in the general category for admission.
     In the  facts and circumstances of the case, there will
be no order as to costs.
S.R.					   Appeal dismissed.
697




