

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Indian Oil Corporation vs Income Tax Officer, Central ... on 8 May, 1986Equivalent citations: 1987 AIR 1897, 1986 SCR  (2)1107
Author: S Mukharji
Bench: Mukharji, Sabyasachi (J)
           PETITIONER:
INDIAN OIL CORPORATION

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
INCOME TAX OFFICER, CENTRAL CIRCLE V, CALCUTTA & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT08/05/1986

BENCH:
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)
BENCH:
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)
PATHAK, R.S.

CITATION:
 1987 AIR 1897		  1986 SCR  (2)1107
 1986 SCC  (3) 409	  1986 SCALE  (1)1022


ACT:
 Income Tax	 Act, 1961  - S.147(1)(a)  - Income escaping
assessment -  Initiation of  proceedings for  reassessment -
Necessary conditions - What are.

HEADNOTE:
     The  assessee  at	the  relevant  time  was  a  company
incorporated under  the laws  of the United Kingdom, and had
its principal  place of	 business in India. The assessee was
all along  assessed under  the Indian  Income Tax Act, 1922.
The assessee  had claimed  deductions every  year of certain
expenses amounting  to L  1,00,000 or over as administrative
charges incurred by the Burmah Oil Company Limited of London
for management	and secretarial work carried on on behalf of
the assessee in London. L 1,00,000 represented approximately
40% of the head office expenses of the London Company which,
according to  assessee, was  a reasonable  allocation having
regard to  the work  done by  the London Office on behalf of
the assessee.  As similar  organisational work	was done  in
London through	the London  Company, the  London office	 was
managing several  companies  and  debiting  prorata  to	 the
companies whose	 affairs they  were managing  and thereafter
the assessment was completed on that basis.
     During  the   assessment  for  the	 year  1953-54,	 the
assessee had  furnished in  support of	its claim for London
Management expenses,  certificate from	the London  Auditors
that the  sum specified	 in the	 certificate was  reasonable
having regard  to the  records and materials produced before
the  auditors,	 which	was   about   10%   of	 the   total
administrative expenses	 incurred by  the Burmah Oil Company
Limited, London.  The Income-Tax  Officer  found  that	such
expenses debited  actually in  the earlier years were far in
excess of  this percentage.  The  assessee  was,  therefore,
required to  furnish a	similar certificate  for each of the
assessment years  1957-58,  1958-59  and  1959-60.  No	such
certificates were  produced by	the assessee  and  by  three
notices dated November 25, 1965 under
1108
s.148 of  the Income-tax  Act 1961,  the Income	 Tax Officer
notified that  he had  reason to believe that the assessee's
income chargeable  to tax  for each  of the  said assessment
year had  escaped assessment within the meaning of s. 147(a)
and he	proposed to  reassess the  income for the said years
and the assessee was required to furnish the returns.
     The assessee challenged the said notices under Art. 226
of the Constitution on the ground that there was no material
to reopen  the assessments. A Single Judge of the High Court
quashed	 the   notices	and  held  that	 all  the  facts  in
possession of  the assessee  were placed  before the  taxing
authority prior to making of the assessment; that it was for
the taxing authority either to accept the claim or to reject
the claim  either wholly  or  in  part;	 that  after  having
accepted  the  claim  in  spite	 of  non-production  of	 the
relevant auditors'  certificate which  was asked  for at one
stage the  revenue could  not later  turn round and say that
the income  of the  assessee had  escaped assessment or been
under-assessed	due  to	 the  failure  of  the	assessee  to
disclose those	very auditors'	reports and  that the  under
assessment, if any, was due to the laches of the Revenue and
not due to any act or omission on the part of the assessee.
     In the  appeal filed by the Revenue, the Division Bench
set aside  the decision	 of the	 Single	 Judge,	 upheld	 the
notices and  held that	the assessee had failed to disclose;
(1) the	 basis of allocation of expenses; (2) correspondence
between the London principal and the assessee company on the
relevant subject;  (3) existence  of  auditors'	 certificate
fixing percentage that would be reasonable for allocation in
respect of  the subsidiary  companies including the assessee
and, therefore, there were prima facie materials to form the
belief that  there was	failure and  omission in the part of
the assessee  to disclose  fully and  truly all the relevant
and material  facts which led to the escapement of income or
under assessment of income of the assessee company.
     Allowing the  appeals of  the appellant-Corporation  to
this Court,
^
     HELD: 1.  To confer  jurisdiction under  clause (a)  of
s.147 of the Income Tax Act, 1961 beyond the period of four
1109
years but within a period of eight years from the end of the
relevant year  under s.	 148 of	 the  assessment  year,	 two
conditions were	 required to be fulfilled: first is that the
Income-tax Officer  must have  reason to  believe  that	 the
income	profits	  or  gains   chargeable  to  tax  had	been
underassessed or  escaped assessment; the second was that he
must  have   reason  to	 believe  that	such  escapement  or
underassessment was  occasioned by reason so far as relevant
for the	 present purpose  to disclose  fully and  truly	 all
material facts	necessary for  the assessment  of that year.
Both  these   conditions  are  conditions  precedent  to  be
satisfied. [1121 G-H; 1122 A-B]
     2. Section	 147(a) postulates  a duty on every assessee
to disclose fully and truly all material facts necessary for
the assessment.	 Therefore, the	 obligation is	to  disclose
facts;	secondly  those	 which	are  material;	thirdly	 the
disclosure must be full and fourthly true. [1125 C-D]
     3. What facts are material and necessary for assessment
will  differ   from  case   to	case.  In  every  assessment
proceedings, for computing or determining the proper tax due
from the  assessee, it	is necessary  to know  all the facts
which help  the assessing authority in coming to the correct
conclusion.  From  the	primary	 facts	in  his	 possession,
whether on  disclosure by the assessee, or discovered by him
on the	basis of  the facts  disclosed,	 or  otherwise,	 the
assessing authority  has to  draw inferences  as to  certain
other facts.  But once the primary facts are with the taxing
authority it  is for  him to  draw  inferences.	 It  is	 not
necessary for the assessee to draw inferences for him. [1125
D-F]
     Calcutta  Discount	 Co.  Ltd.  v.	Income-tax  Officer,
Companies District  I, Calcutta	 and Another,  41 ITR 191 at
199, S.	 Narayanappa and  Others v.  Commissioner of Income-
tax, Bangalore, 63 ITR 219, Commissioner of Income-tax, West
Bengal, and  Another v. Hemchandra Kar and Others, 77 ITR 1,
Income-tax  Officer,  I-Ward,  Hundi  Circle,  Calcutta	 and
Others v.  Madnani Engineering	Works Ltd., 118 ITR 1, Ganga
Saran &	 Sons P.  Ltd. v. Income-tax Officer and others, 130
ITR 1 at 13, Income Tax Officer, I Ward, Distt. VI, Calcutta
and others  v. Lakhmani Mewal Das, 103 ITR 437 and Sheo Nath
Singh v.  Appellate  Assistant	Commissioner  of  Income-Tax
(Central), Calcutta  and others,  82 ITR  147 at 153, relied
upon.
1110
 P.R. Mukharjee  v.	 Commissioner  of  Income-tax,	West
Bengal, 30  ITR	 535  and  Hazi	 Amir  Mohd.  Mir  Ahmed  v.
Commissioner of Income-tax, Amritsar, 110 ITR 630, approved.
     4.(i)  The	 learned  Trial	 Judge	was  right  and	 the
Appellate Court	 was in	 error in  holding that	 there	were
materials from	which it  could reasonably  be held that the
assessee was  guilty in not disclosing the basic facts.[1127
F]
     4.(ii) In	the instant case, the assessee had all along
disclosed and  the Revenue  was aware that London management
expenses were  incurred on  behalf of  the assessee  by	 the
London Company	who were  managing  the	 affairs  and  doing
certain works  for the	assessee as  well as  certain allied
companies belonging  to Burmah	Oil Corporation	 Group.	 The
expenses for  these allied  concerns were  on pro-rata basis
charged by the London office and a certain proportion of the
expenses were  allocated to  different	companies  and	they
debited certain	 portions, i.e.these  amounts were  realised
from the  assessee and	allied companies  in  proportion  to
which the  London company  debited them	 those charges. This
fact was  known all  along to  the Revenue  while making the
original assessment  for the  relevant assessment years. The
audit report  of the assessee company was supplied but it is
not clear whether the audit report of the London company was
supplied and  was asked for. It is unlikely that when London
company	 was   debiting	 the   assessee	 company  and  other
companies in the audit report every year, there would be any
note that  such debits	by  which  the	London	company	 got
certain money  which were  excessive i.e. the London company
realised more than it had actually incurred of the expenses.
In  any	  event,  however,  the	 amount	 realised  would  be
mentioned in the audit report as a basic fact. That has been
disclosed, to  the Revenue  at	the  time  of  the  original
assessment. The	 nature and the quantum of the work done had
also been  disclosed. Whether it was excessive or not was an
inferential fact.  The Income-tax Officer, from time to time
had some  doubts as  to whether the entirety of the expenses
debited were really incurred for the assessee company by the
London company or whether that was unreasonable or excessive
having regard  to the  magnitude of  the work  done  by	 the
London company	but that would be a matter of opinion and on
inference drawn	 from the  amount of the work in correlation
to the amount debited the fact what was done, what was being
claimed by the London
1111
office and the difficulties in producing the accounts or the
opinion of  the auditors  for which  the Income-tax Officers
had called  upon the  assessee were  all known to Income-tax
Officers at  the time of making the original assessments. In
spite of  the same,  the Income-tax  Officer chose to assess
the assessee  in the  manner he	 did. In  the light  of	 the
opinion of  the Auditors  for the  assessment  year  1963-64
wherein his  opinion that  ten per  cent would be reasonable
charge might be good information for which the assessment of
the assessee  could be reopened under clause (b) but on this
basis alone  it could  not be  said that  the  assessee	 had
failed to  disclose fully  and truly  all basic facts at the
time of	 the original  assessment of the relevant assessment
years. There  was no  evidence or  allegation that  such  an
opinion was  there available  with the	assessee company the
time of the original assessments. Even if such an opinion as
opinion evidence  be considered	 as a basic fact, a question
on which  no opinion  is required to be expressed, there was
no evidence  that such	opinion was with the assessee at the
time or	 before the  completion of  the original assessments
for the relevant assessment years. [1125 F-H; 1126 A-H; 1127
A]
     4.(iii)  All   the	 basic	 facts	in  this  case	were
disclosed, it  was however  not disclosed as to what was the
opinion of  the Auditor, as to what is reasonable allocation
share of  the assessee	having regard  to the amount of work
done on	 behalf of the assessee company of the London office
expenses. There	 is  no	 conclusive  evidence  that  at	 the
relevant time  i.e. at	the time  of filing  of	 the  return
before the  assessments, such  Auditors' opinion  about	 the
reasonableness was there. Secondly, what would be reasonable
or not	would be  an inference	of the	auditor. The  amount
spent, the  nature of  the work alleged to have been done by
London office on behalf of the assessee and the basis of the
allocation had	been explained	in reply to the queries made
by the Income-tax Officer before the assessment. The Income-
tax Officer had asked at one point of time for the auditors'
opinion. It  was stated	 that  such  opinion  could  not  be
supplied. In  spite of	the same, the Income-tax Officer did
not choose  to make  a best  judgment assessment and did not
draw any  adverse inference against the assessee. It cannot,
therefore, be  held that there was failure to disclose fully
and truly all basic facts. [1127 A-E]



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION : CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 1189-
1190 OF 1974
1112
     From the  Judgment and  Order dated  7.12.1973  of	 the
Calcutta High Court in Appln. No. 189 and 196 of 1971.
     Dr. Devi  Pal, Ms.	 M. Seal,  D.N. Gupta, H.K. Datt and
Miss Mridul Ray for the Appellant.
     C.M. Lodha, Dr. V. Gaurishankar, Miss A. Subhashini and
C.V. Subba Rao for the Respondents.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     SABYASACHI MUKHARJI,  J. Whether  the reopening  of the
assessments of	the assessee  under section  147(a)  of	 the
Indian Income  Tax Act, 1961 (hereinafter referred to as the
'Act') was  valid, is the question involved in these appeals
by special  leave from	the Bench  decision of Calcutta High
Court  dated   7th  December,  1973.  The  assessment  years
involved are 1957-58, 1958-59 and 1959-60.
     It may  be mentioned  that on  notices being issued for
reopening of  the assessments  under section  148 of the Act
under  condition  147(a)  of  the  said	 Act,  the  assessee
challenged the said notices on the ground that there were no
materials to  initiate such  reopening. Such  challenge	 was
upheld by the learned single judge of the High Court and the
notices in question were quashed.
     The revenue  being aggrieved  preferred appeals  before
the division  bench of the High Court. The division bench of
the High  Court reversed  the findings	of the learned trial
judge and the notices were upheld. Hence these appeals.
     The assets	 and liabilities  of erstwhile the Assam Oil
Company have since then vested in the Indian Oil Corporation
and on an oral application having been made on behalf of the
assessee, we  have directed  that the name of the Indian Oil
Corporation be substituted.
     The  assessee  at	the  relevant  time  was  a  company
incorporated  under  the  appropriate  laws  of	 the  United
Kingdom, and  had its  principal place	of business  at	 the
relevant time  in India	 at Digboi in the State of Assam. It
carried on  business, inter alia, in oils and lubricants. As
the years involved were
1113
prior to  the introduction  of	the  Act  in  question,	 the
assessee was  all along assessed under the provisions of the
Indian Income-Tax  Act, 1922  (hereinafter called  the '1922
Act'). In  its assessment  under the  1922 Act, the assessee
had  claimed  deductions  every	 year  of  certain  expenses
amounting to  # 1,00,000  or over  as administrative charges
incurred by  the Burmah	 Oil Company  Limited of  London for
management and	secretarial work carried on on behalf of the
assessee in  London. For  the assessment  year	1951-52,  it
might be mentioned, the Income-tax Officer wrote a letter to
the assessee  asking for certain informations and one of the
informations asked  for was  regarding London  charges.	 The
assessee was  asked to	furnish a schedule in respect of the
London charges	and also  to let the Income-tax Officer know
whether any  reserve had  been debited	to this	 account  of
London charges.	 The letter  was dated	19th December, 1952.
The assessee  by its  letter replied  to that query where it
informed  the	Income-tax  Officer   that  as	 advised  in
connection with the 1950-51 assessment, London charges being
about #	 1,00,000 represented  approximately 40% of the head
office expenses of the London Company being the charges made
by the	Burmah Oil  Company for	 management and	 secretarial
work carried out on behalf of the assessee company in London
covering Stores	 Purchasing, Accounting,  Staff,  Geological
and other  Departments. The  assessee further  informed	 the
taxing authorities  that it  had been  advised by its London
office that  the amount	 represented a reasonable allocation
having regard  to the  work done  by the  London  office  on
behalf of  the assessee.  As the  point in question in these
appeals is whether there was failure or omission on the part
of the	assessee it  is necessary  to refer in detail to the
correspondence. For  the assessment year 1951-52 in response
to the	enquiries the assessee made it clear that the London
charges represented  the charges  made	by  the	 Burmah	 Oil
Company which  managed the assessee company along with other
companies in  respect of the management work and secretarial
work carried  out  in  London  covering	 the  various  items
indicated before.  In other  words as similar organisational
work were  done in  London through  the London	company, the
London office  was managing  several companies	and debiting
pro-rata to  the companies whose affairs they were managing.
The assessment	was completed  thereafter apparently  on the
said basis.
     Similarly for the assessment year 1953-54, it appears
1114
that there was discussion between the Income-tax Officer and
the assessee and certain queries were made in respect of the
London office  charges amounting  to #	1,00,000 included in
the trading  account for  1952. The  assessee by  its letter
dated 9th  December, 1953  informed the	 Income-tax  Officer
that the  assessee's London Principals had advised them that
the total expenses of the London office for 1952 amounted to




