

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Andhra Re-Rolling Works, ... vs Union Of India & Ors on 5 May, 1986Equivalent citations: 1986 AIR 1964, 1986 SCR  (2)1001
Author: V B Eradi
Bench: Eradi, V. Balakrishna (J)
           PETITIONER:
ANDHRA RE-ROLLING WORKS, HYDERABAD

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
UNION OF INDIA & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT05/05/1986

BENCH:
ERADI, V. BALAKRISHNA (J)
BENCH:
ERADI, V. BALAKRISHNA (J)
KHALID, V. (J)

CITATION:
 1986 AIR 1964		  1986 SCR  (2)1001
 1986 SCC  Supl.  263	  JT 1986   322
 1986 SCALE  (1)1208


ACT:
     Central Excise and Salt Act 1944 : s. 3 & Item No.
26AA(i) First Schedule/Central Excise Rules 1944 r. 10 & 10A
- M.S.	Rounds manufactured  by	 re-rolling  untested  rails
Excise duty  - Liability  of -	Eff ct	of Notification	 No.
89/62 dated May 10, 1962.



HEADNOTE:
     Item No.  26AA(i) of  the First Schedule to the Central
Excise and Salt Act, 1944, at the relevant time provided for
levy of excise duty on various semi finished steel items and
all other  rolled, forged  or extruded	shapes and sections,
not otherwise specified.
     The appellant converted three thousand metric tonnes of
untested rails	into M.S. Rounds of different specifications
by the	process of  re-rolling, in execution of the contract
entered into  between him  and the fifth respondent. me last
delivery of  the finished  products was effected on February
23, 1966  and the  payment  received.  Nearly  eight  months
thereafter, on	October 17,  1966 the  Inspector of  Central
Excise issued  notices to  the appellant under r. 10A of the
Central Excise	Rules, 1944 demanding payment of excise duty
on the	rounds re-rolled.  A representation to the Assistant
Collector contending  that the	demand for payment of excise
duty was  illegal, since  the M.S. Rounds had been re-rolled
from rails  which were	exempt from levy of excise duty, was
rejected.
     The appeal	 to the	 Collector and the revision petition
to the Central Government were also rejected.
     The appellant,  thereafter filed a petition in the High
Court seeking  an appropriate  writ quashing  the notices of
demand on  the ground  that the M.S. rounds in question were
not liable to be assessed to duty under item No. 26AA of the
First Schedule to the Act and that in any event the impugned
demands were  time barred  under r.  10 of the Rules and the
resort
1002
sought to  be made to the provisions contained in r. 10A was
not legal  or warranted.  The High Court negatived all these
contentions and dismissed the petition.
     In the  appeal by	certificate to	this  Court  it	 was
further contended  that the  M.S. Rounds manufactured by the
appellant were	exempted by Notification No. 89/62 dated May
10, 1962, which granted remission of the excise duty payable
under item  No. 26AA  to the  extent of	 the amount  of duty
already paid  on the  articles from which the iron and steel
products falling under that item had been made.
     Dismissing the appeal, the Court,
^
     HELD: 1.  The M.S.	 Rounds manufactured out of untested
rails by  the process of re-rolling fell within the ambit of
item No. 26AA(i) of the First Schedule to the Central Excise
and Salt-Act  1944, which  expressly took  within its  scope
"all other  rolled, forged  or extruded shapes And sections,
not otherwise  specified", and	were liable to be charged to
duty under the said item. [1005 G; 1006 B]
     2. The ambit of r. 10 of the Central Excise Rules, 1944
is confined  to cases  where the  demand is being made for a
short levy caused wholly by one of the reasons given in that
rule. It  pre-supposes an assessment which could be reopened
on specific grounds within the period specified therein. The
time limit  of three  months mentioned	in that	 rule has no
applicability in cases where there has been no assessment of
duty before  the goods	were removed  from the factory. Such
cases are  covered by  the provisions  of r. 10A, which is a
residuary provision authorising the demand and collection of
any deficiency	in duty	 or of	any other  sum of  any	kind
payable under  the Act	or the	rules without  any limit  of
time. [1006 D; F-H]
     Assistant	Collector   of	Central	  Excise,   Calcutta
Division v. Rational Tobacco Company of India Ltd., [1973] 1
S.C.R. 822  and D.R.  Kohli and	 Ors. v. Atul Products Ltd.,
[1985] 2 S.C.R. 832, referred to.
     3. It  is only  if the  appropriate amount	 of duty had
already been  paid on  the  article  which  formed  the	 raw
material for  manufacture of the product covered by item No.
26AA, that
1003
the  manufacturer   will  be  entitled	to  a  proportionate
remission of the duty on the latter product. Inasmuch as the
untested rails in the instant case were exempt from duty and
no amount  whatever had been paid by way of duty on the said
article out  of which the M.S. Rounds were manufactured, the
benefit of  the notification  No. 89/62	 dated May  10, 1962
could not be claimed by the appellant. [1005 G-H; 1006 A-B]



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION :  Civil Appeal No. 56 of
1972.
     From the  Judgment and  Order dated  5.11.1970  of	 the
Andhra Pradesh High Court in W.P. No. 3354 of 1968. C
     Anil B.  Divan, D.N.  Misra, Ashok	 Sagar and P.K. Rama
Narain for the Appellant.
     Gobind Das	 P.P. Rao,  Miss Halida	 Khatun, R.N. Poddar
and A.K. Ganguli for the Resondents.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     BALAKRISHNA ERADI,	 J. This  appeal has  been preferred
against the  judgment of  the High  Court of  Andhra Pradesh
dated November	5, 1970	 on the strength of a certificate of
fitness granted by the High Court.
     The appellant  is a  firm carrying	 on business of 'Re-
rolling' having	 its factory  at Moosapet  near	 Sanatnagar,
Hyderabad. A contract was entered into between the appellant
and the	 5th respondent,  whereby the appellant undertook to
convert 3000  metric tonnes  of second	class untested rails
into M.S.  Rounds of different specifications by the process
of Re-rolling.	Accordingly, the  quantity  of	3000  metric
tonnes of  second class	 untested rails	 was supplied to the
appellant by  the 5th  respondent during  the period between
29.4.1964 to  23.2.1966 and  the appellant duly executed the
work and  'delivered the  M.S. Rounds  and received  the Re-
rolling	 charges   in  accordance  with	 the  terms  of	 the
agreement. The	last delivery  of the  finished products was
effected by the appellant on 23.2.1966.
     Nearly eight months thereafter, on October 17, 1966 the
1004
Inspector of  Central Excise, Ameerpet issued notices to the
appellant dated October 17, 1966 demanding payment of excise
duty on the Rounds Re-rolled by the petitioner from untested
rails. me  demand notices were purported to have been issued
under Rule  10-A of  the Central  Excise  Rules,  1944.	 The
appellant filed	 a written  representation to  the Assistant
Collector, Central  Excise, Hyderabad  contending  that	 the
demand for  payment of	excise duty  on the  M.S. Rounds was
illegal since  they had been Re-rolled from rails which were
exempt from levy of excise duty.
     The Assistant  Collector by his order dated January 17,
1967 rejected  the said contention. However, while doing so,
he gave	 a direction  to the  Inspector of Central Excise to
revise the  demands in	accordance with	 the rates  of	duty
which were  current during  the different  periods. Pursuant
thereto, three	revised demand	notices dated March 18, 1967
were  issued  to  the  appellant.  The	appellant  thereupon
preferred  an  appeal  to  the	Collector,  Central  Excise,
Hyderabad. But that appeal was rejected by the Collector and
the demands were confirmed. A Revision Petition filed by the
appellant to  the Central  Government also met with the same
fate. Thereafter  the appellant filed a Writ Petition in the
High Court  of Andhra	Pradesh	 seeking an appropriate writ
quashing the  notices of  demand on the ground that the M.S.
Rounds in  question were  not liable  to be assessed to duty
under Item  No. 26-AA  of the  First Schedule of the Central
Excise and Salt Act, 1944 (hereinafter called 'the Act') and
that in	 any event  the impugned  demands were	time  barred
under Rule  10 of  the Central	Excise Rules,  1944 and	 the
resort sought to be made to the provisions contained in Rule
10-A was  not legal  or warranted.  Neither of the aforesaid
contentions  found   favour  with   the	  High	 Court	 and
accordingly, the  Writ Petition	 was dismissed.	 Hence	this
appeal by the appellant.
     The description  of goods	given in Column No. 1 of the
First Schedule	to the	Act against  Item No. 26-AA(i) as it
stood at the relevant time was in the following terms :-
	  " Semi  finished steel  including blooms, billets,
	  slabs, sheet	bars, rods,  coils,  wires,  joists,
	  girders,  angles,  channels,	tees,  beams,  zeds,
	  trough, pilling and all other rolled, forged or
1005
	  extruded  shapes   and  sections;   not  otherwise
	  specified.
In execution  of  the  contract	 entered  into	between	 the
appellant  and	 the  5th   respondent,	 the  appellant	 had
converted 3000	metric tonnes  of untested  rails into	M.S.
Rounds of  different specifications  by the  process of	 Re-
rolling. This  undoubtedly amounted  to	 manufacture.  Since
Item No.  26-AA(i) expressly  takes within  its	 scope	"all
other rolled,  forged or  extruded shapes  and sections, not
otherwise specified",  the M.S.	 Rounds manufactured  by the
appellant by  the process  of Re-rolling were clearly liable
to excise duty under the said item. C
     We find  no substance in the contention urged on behalf
of the	appellant that	the M.S.  Rounds manufactured  by it
were covered  by the  exemption granted	 by the Notification
No.
     89/62, dated May 10, 1962. The relevant portion of that
Notification was In the following terms :- n
	  "The Central Government hereby exempts with effect
	  from 24th  April, 1962  iron	and  steel  products
	  falling under item No. 26-AA of the First Schedule
	  to the  Central Excise  and Salt Act, 1944 if made
	  from another	article falling	 under the said item
	  and having  already paid the appropriate amount of
	  duty, from  so much  of the  duty of	excise as is
	  equivalent  to   the	duty  payable  on  the	said
	  article.
The effect  of this Notification was only to grant a partial
remission of  the excise duty payable under Item No. 26AA of
the First  Schedule to	the extent of the appropriate amount
of duty	 which was  already paid on the articles from out of
which the  steel products  falling under  Item No. 26-AA had
been made.  In the  case before	 us  the  M.S.	Rounds	were
manufactured by Re-rolling untested rails on which no excise
duty whatever  had been	 paid. It is only if the appropriate
amount of  duty had  already been  paid on the article which
formed the  raw-material  for  manufacture  of	the  product
covered Item  No.  26-AA,  that	 the  manufacturer  will  be
entitled to  a proportionate  remission of  the duty  on the
latter product.	 Inasmuch as  the untested rails were exempt
from duty and hence no amount whatever had H
1006
been paid  by way  of duty  on the  said article from out of
which the  M.S. Rounds were manufactured, it is obvious that
the benefit  of the  Notification cannot  be claimed  by the
appellant.
     We have  therefore, no  hesitation to  uphold the	view
expressed  by	the  High   Court  that	  the  M.S.   Rounds
manufactured by	 the appellant fell within the ambit of Item
No. 26-AA  and were  liable to	be charged to duty under the
said item.
     The next point urged on behalf of the appellant is that
the demand  for duty  was bad  since it	 was made beyond the
period of  three months which is the time limit specified in
Rule 10	 of the	 Central Excise	 Rules, 1944. m e High Court
has  categorically   found  that  in  the  present  case  no
assessment or  levy of	duty had  been made at the time when
the goods were removed from the factory of the appellant. As
pointed out  by this Court in Assistant Collector of Central
Excise, Calcutta  M vision  v. National	 Tobacco Company  of
India Ltd.,  [1973] 1  S.C.R. 822  Rule 10  pre-supposes  an
assessment which  could be  re-opened  on  specific  grounds
within the  period specified therein. The relative scope and
applicability of Rules 10 and 10-A were considered in detail
by this	 Court in  the said  decision and  it was  explained
"that Rule  10 should  be confined to cases where the demand
is being  made for  a short levy caused wholly by one of the
reasons given  in that	rule so that an assessment has to be
reopened. The  said decision has been followed in the recent
pronouncement in  the case  of D.  R. Kohli and Ors. v. Atul
Products Ltd., [1985] 2 S.C.R. 832.
     Applying the  tests laid  down in the aforesaid rulings
it is clear that the time limit of three months specified in
Rule 10	 has no	 applicability at  all in  the present	case
since there  has been no assessment of duty before the goods
were removed  and it  is not a case of short levy occasioned
by any	of the	reasons specified in the said Rule. The case
is, therefore,	covered by the provisions of Rule 10A, which
is  a	residuary  provision   authorising  the	 demand	 and
collection of  any deficiency in duty or of any other sum of
any kind  payable to Central Government under the Act or the
Rules without  any limit  of time.  Hence the High Court was
clearly right in
1007
rejecting the  contention of  the appellant  that the demand
notices issued	to it  under  Rule  10-A  were	illegal	 and
unsustainable.
     The appeal	 accordingly fails  and	 is  dismissed	with
costs.
P.S.S.					   Appeal dismissed.
1008




