

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Brij Behari Sahai vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 5 August, 1986Equivalent citations: 1986 AIR 1895, 1986 SCR  (3) 468
Author: M Rangnath
Bench: Misra Rangnath
           PETITIONER:
BRIJ BEHARI SAHAI

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH

DATE OF JUDGMENT05/08/1986

BENCH:
MISRA RANGNATH
BENCH:
MISRA RANGNATH
VENKATARAMIAH, E.S. (J)

CITATION:
 1986 AIR 1895		  1986 SCR  (3) 468
 1986 SCC  (3) 564	  JT 1986    57
 1986 SCALE  (2)154


ACT:
     Land  Acquisition	 Act  4:   ss.	23   &	35-Temporary
occupation of  land-Statutory solatium	on The	compensation
decreed-Whether admissible.



HEADNOTE:
     The appeals  raise the question whether in a case where
the Land Acquisition officer takes temporary occupation, the
person interested  in the  land was  entitled to solatium on
the compensation  decreed in  a proceeding under s.35 of the
land Acquisition Act. The High Court refused to allow it.
     Dismissing the appeals, the Court
^
     HELD: 1.  The  provisions	of  s.	23(2)  of  the	Land
Acquisition Act	 providing for payment of statutory solatium
are not	 attracted to  a case of compensation under s. 35 of
that Act. [470H]
     2. Temporary occupation of land, provided in Part Vl of
the  Act,   is	distinct  from,	 and  is  not  included	 in,
acquisition of	land under  Part II  of the  Act because  in
acquisition in exercise of the right of eminent domain title
of the	owner is  extinguished and the property vests in the
State, whereas	when temporary occupation is taken the title
of the owner remains untouched. [470C-D]
     Tan Bug  Taim v. Collector of Bombay, AIR 1946 Bom. 216
referred to.
     3. Clause	"secondly" in  s. 23(1)	 of the	 Act is	 not
applicable to  temporary occupation  covered by s. 35 of the
Act. Statutory	solatium as  provided in s. 23(2) of the Act
does not  apply to  a  case  of	 damage	 covered  by  clause
"secondly" in  s. 23(1) itself. "Market value" occurs in the
first clause  of s. 23(l) of the Act and sub-s. (2) of s. 23
refers to  market value.  Solatium has	reference to  market
value and the
469
mandate to  pay solatium is only in respect of market value.
compensation under  s. 35  of the  Act has  no reference  to
market value  and the  actual loss  sustained by the persons
interested  in	 the   land   only   is	  intended   to	  be
compensated.[470F-H]



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal Nos. 1041 of
1972 and 578 of 1975
     From the  Judgment and  order dated  28.3.1970  of	 the
Allahabad High Court in First Appeal No.141 of 1958.
     Manoj Swarup and Pramod Swarup for the Appellant.
     Prithvi Raj and Mrs. Shobha Dikshit for the respondent.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     RANGANATH	MISRA,	 J.  Both   these  appeals   are  by
certificate  from  the	High  Court  of	 Allahabad  and	 are
directed  against   its	 modifying   common  judgment  in  a
proceeding under  Section 35  of the  Land Acquisition	Act,
1894 ('Act' for short).
     Appellant Brij  Behari Sahai  held on lease little more
than 42	 acres of  agricultural land out of Military Estates
at Allahabad  near the	confluence of  the  Ganges  and	 the
Yamuna. For the purposes of Kumbh Mela in 1954 possession of
the said  land was taken from November 1953 till March 1954.
The Land  Acquisition officer  made an Award of compensation
and there  being  difference  as  to  the  adequacy  of	 the
compensation, the  matter was  referred	 to  the  Court	 for
decision. Against  the decision	 of the	 Court enhancing the
compensation, the  State of  Uttar Pradesh carried an appeal
to the	High Court of Allahabad. Brij Behari Sahai preferred
a cross-objection  asking for  further	enhancement  of	 the
compensation. The  High Court  dealt with the appeal and the
cross-objection and  enhanced the compensation on five heads
as indicated  in the  penultimate paragraph  of its judgment
but refused to allow statutory solatium of 15%. Against this
judgment of  the High Court two separate appeals-one by Brij
Behari Sahai  and the  other by	 the State  of Uttar Pradesh
have been brought before this Court.
     Claimant's	 counsel   asked  for	enhancement  of	 the
compensation on	 the basis  of evidence but in the course of
hearing we declined to
470
entertain such	a contention.  Similarly, on  behalf of	 the
State challenge	 was made  to the  quantum  of	compensation
decreed in  the High  Court and	 we did not agree to go into
that aspect.  The appeal  of the State has, therefore, to be
dismissed. One	contention raised by the claimant relates to
entitlement of	solatium on  the compensation  decreed. That
question requires to be examined.
     It is a fact that the High Court referred to Section 23
(2) of	the Act while fixing the quantum of compensation. We
are of	the view  that Part  Vl of  the Land Acquisition Act
contains a  complete code  by itself  so  far  as  temporary
occupation is  concerned and  provisions of  s. 23  are	 not
attracted. Parts 111, IV and V of the Act are connected with
acquisition covered  by Part  II. Part	VI on the other hand
deals with  temporary occupation of the land. In acquisition
in exercise  of the  right of  eminent domain  title of	 the
owner is  extinguished and  the property vests in the State.
On the	other hand, when temporary occupation is taken under
Part VI	 of the	 Act the  title remains untouched. It is the
possession of  the  property  which  alone  is	taken  over.
Reference may  he made to the proviso in s. 36(2) of the Act
which contemplates that in a case where possession alone has
been taken  under s.  35 but  the land	becomes	 permanently
unfit to  be used  for the  purposes for  which it  was used
immediately before  possession was  taken, it is open to the
owner of  the property to require the appropriate Government
to take	 steps for  acquisition of  the land. This itself is
indicative of  the position  that when	possession had	been
taken under  s.	 35  of	 the  Act  it  was  not	 a  case  of
acquisition under Part II thereof.
     We agree  with the	 view indicated	 in Tan	 Bug Taim v.
Collector of  Bombay, A.I.R.  1946 Bom.	 216. that temporary
occupation of land provided in Part VI is distinct from, and
is not	included in,  acquisition of  land. We	have already
pointed out that clause 'secondly' in s. 23(1) of the Act is
not applicable	to temporary  occupation covered by s. 35 of
the Act.  Statutory solatium  as provided in s. 23(2) of the
Act does  not apply  to a  case of  damage covered by clause
'secondly' in  s. 23(1) itself. 'Market value' occurs in the
first clause  of s. 23(1) of the Act and sub-s. (2) of s. 23
refers to  market value.  Solatium has	reference to  market
value and  the mandate to pay solatium is only in respect of
market value.  Compensation under  s. 35  of the  Act has no
reference to  market value  and the actual loss sustained by
the persons  interested	 in  the  land	is  intended  to  be
compensated. In	 that view  of the  matter,  to	 a  case  of
compensation under  s. 35  of the  Act the  provisions of s.
23(2) of the Act cannot be applied. The claimant is thus not
entitled to any
471
solatium on the compensation determined by the High Court in
this case
     The net  result is that both the appeals are dismissed.
Parties are directed to bear their own costs throughout.
P.S.S.					   Appeals dismissed
472




