

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.

Supreme Court of India
Arya Samaj, Sagar & Ors vs Pinjamal & Anr on 8 August, 1986Equivalent citations: 1986 AIR 1789, 1986 SCR  (3) 514
Author: S Mukharji
Bench: Mukharji, Sabyasachi (J)
           PETITIONER:
ARYA SAMAJ, SAGAR & ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
PINJAMAL & ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT08/08/1986

BENCH:
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)
BENCH:
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)
SINGH, K.N. (J)

CITATION:
 1986 AIR 1789		  1986 SCR  (3) 514
 1986 SCC  (4)	 3	  JT 1986   143
 1986 SCALE  (2)238


ACT:
     Madhya Pradesh  Accommodation  Control  Act,  1961,  s.
12(1)(f)-Eviction of  tenant on	 ground	 of  requirement  by
landlord for additional accommodation -When arises.



HEADNOTE:
     The landlord-appellant  running a	girls' school. filed
an eviction  suit against  the tenant,	the  predecessor-in-
interest of  the respondent,  on the  ground that  it needed
additional accommodation for the school.
     The trial	Judge as well as the Appellate Court ordered
eviction  under	  s.  12(i)(f)	 of   the   Madhya   Pradesh
Accommodation Control  Act, 1961  holding that the object of
the appellant-society  was to  get  the	 building  back	 for
expansion of its activities and had proved the same.
     The High  Court, however, in second appeal examined the
sanctioned plan, held that the landlord's claim for eviction
was on the ground of reconstruction, and the series of shops
shown in  the plan  were meant	to be let out to tenants and
set aside  the order  of eviction  passed by  the two courts
below.
     Allowing the appeal to this Court,
^
     HELD: l(i).  The order  of the High Court is set aside.
The orders  of the  Additional District	 Judge and the Trial
Court are  restored with  the modification  that in case any
part of	 the building  is used	for shop or let out as shop,
the first  option should  be given to the respondents and of
that the  building must	 be constructed	 on the basis of the
appended sanctioned plan. [517G; E]
     1(ii). The	 High Court fell into error in misconstruing
the plan Ext. 4 and in holding that the landlord's claim for
eviction was on the ground of reconstruction. The High Court
went on	 to examine  whether s.	 12(h) of  the Act  had been
complied with. There was no such necessity
515
in view	 of the	 facts as  found by the two courts below. In
any case,  in second  appeal the  High Court should not have
interfered with such a question of fact. [517B-C]
      2.  The case  of	the  landlord-appellant	 is  clearly
covered by  s.12(1)(f) of  the Madhya  Pradesh Accommodation
Control Act,  1961. The mere fact that the landlord intended
to make	 alterations in	 the house  either on account of his
sweet will  or on  account of  absolute necessity in view of
the condition of the house, would not affect the question of
his requiring  the house  bona fide  and reasonably  for his
occupation, when  he had  proved his  need for occupying the
house. [516E-F]
     Ramniklal Pitambardas  Mehta  v.  Inderadaman  Amratlal
Sheth [1964] 8 SCR p.1, followed.



JUDGMENT:
     CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 2637 of
1977
     From the  Judgment and  order dated  9.11.1976  of	 the
Madhya Pradesh High Court in Second Appeal No. 223 of 1976.
     Rameshwar Nath for the Appellants.
     Y.K. Jain for the Respondents.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     SABYASACHI MUKHARJI,  J. This  is an  appeal by special
leave arising  from the Judgment and order of the High Court
of Madhya  Pradesh at Jabalpur dated 26th October, 1977. The
landlord-appellant  filed  the	eviction  suit	against	 the
tenant, the  predecessor in interest of the respondents. The
appellant runs	a girls' school, being covered by one of its
objects. It  needed additional	accommodation for  the	said
purpose. The building was also in dilapidated condition. The
learned trial  Judge as	 well  as  Appellate  Court  ordered
eviction  under	  section  12  (f)  of	the  Madhya  Pradesh
Accommodation Control  Act, 1961.  The respondents  were  in
occupation of an old shed as a tenant in the said house.
     Section 12 (f). Of the aforesaid Act gives the landlord
the right to evict on the grounds, inter alia, as follows:
516
	  "that the  accommodation let	for  non-residential
	  purposes is  required bonafide by the landlord for
	  the purpose of continuing or starting his business
	  or  that  any	 of  his  major	 sons  or  unmarried
	  daughters if	he is  the owner  thereof or  of any
	  person for whose benefit the accommodation is held
	  and 13  that the  landlord or	 such person  has no
	  other	   reasonably	 suitable    non-residential
	  accommodation of  his own in his occupation in the
	  city or town concerned."
     Section 12	 (g) deals  with  the  situation  where	 the
building has  become unsafe  or unfit and the landlord wants
the premises for carrying out repairs. Section 12 (h) on the
other hand  deals with	the case  where the accommodation is
required  bonafide  by	the  landlord  for  the	 purpose  of
building or  re-building or  making thereto  any substantial
additions or  alterations and  such additions or alterations
cannot be  carried out	without	 the  accommodation  in	 the
occupation of  tenant being  vacated. Similar  provision  in
section 31 (1)(g) under the Bombay Rents, Hotels and Lodging
House Rates  Control Act,  1947 came  up  for  consideration
before	this   Court  in   Ramniklal  Pitambardas  Mehta  v.
Inderadaman Amratlal  Sheth, [1964]  8 SCR  p.1. This  Court
held that  the case  in question fell under clause (g) which
is similar  to clause  (f) of  the instant case before us of
Madhya Pradesh	Accommodation Control  Act, section  12 (f).
This Court further held that the mere fact that the landlord
intended to  make alterations in the house either on account
of his	sweet will  or on  account of  absolute necessity in
view of	 the condition	of the	house, would  not affect the
question of  his requiring the house bonafide and reasonably
for  his  occupation,  when  he	 had  proved  his  need	 for
occupying the house. Nothing further need be proved. In this
case, the  case of the landlord-appellant is clearly covered
by section  12(1)(f). The  fact that  the building had to be
reconstructed  for  the	 said  purpose	is  irrelevant.	 The
learned trial  judge as	 well as the learned appellate court
read the sanctioned plan and came to the conclusion that the
appellant had proved in this case all the need for expansion
of the	building for  girls' education	which was one of the
objects of  the appellant  society. The	 High Court,  in our
opinion, misread  the sanctioned plan which is Ext. 4, which
according to  the High	Court showed  in front	side of	 the
building abutting  the road,  a series	of shops  are to  be
constructed. The High Court was of the view that these shops
were meant  to be  let out to tenants. We are of the opinion
that this was a misreading of the plan. These shops were not
indicated as  shops to	be reconstructed,  but	as  existing
building was  to be  reconstructed for the purpose of school
there was no intention of construc-
517
tion of	 shops and  let these out. There was no intention of
the landlord-appellant	to build  for the purpose of letting
it out.	 The learned  trial judge as well as appellate judge
held that  the object  was to  get  the	 building  back	 for
expansion of  the activities  of the  appellant society. The
High Court,  therefore, in  our opinion	 fell into  error in
misconstruing the  plan and  in holding	 that the landlord's
claim for  eviction was	 on the ground of reconstruction. In
that view  of the  matter the High Court went on the examine
whether section	 12 (h)	 of the	 said Act  had been complied
with. There  was no  such necessity, in view of the facts as
found by the two courts below. In any case, in second appeal
the High  Court should	not  have  interfered  with  such  a
question of  fact. This	 was unwarranted under the facts and
circumstances of  the case and on the evidence on record and
in view of the decision in Ramniklal's case (supra).
     Mr. Jain appearing for the tenant sought to urge before
us that	 the plan  indicated that the shops were intended to
be reconstructed  in  the  new	plan  Shri  Rameshwar  Nath,
Counsel for  the  appellant  assured  us  that	it  was	 the
intention of the society to reconstruct the building for the
purpose of  running  the  school.  In  order  to  avoid	 any
apprehension, though  we allow	the appeal  and restore	 the
order of  the learned  appellate court	as well	 as  learned
trial court,  we make  it clear	 that in case if any part of
the building  is used  for shops  or let  out as  shops, the
first option  should be given to the respondents. We further
direct that the building must be constructed on the basis of
the plan  sanctioned and  as appended in the records of this
case. In view of the fact that the respondents were carrying
on business  for quite long time, they should have some time
to vacate.  We direct that the respondents should vacate the
premises in  their occupation  by 31st	December,  1986	 and
handover the  same to  the appellant to enable the appellant
to proceed  with construction.	The respondent	will file an
undertaking on usual terms within a month from today.
     The order of the High Court is set aside. The orders of
the learned  Addl. District  Judge and	the trial  court are
restored subject  to the  modifications indicated  above. We
further direct	that after  obtaining the  possession of the
premises from  the respondents, the appellant should proceed
to construct  as quickly  as  possible.	 In  the  facts	 and
circumstances of  the case  the parties	 will pay  and	bear
their own costs.
A.P.J.					     Appeal allowed.
518




